brain
sciences
Review

Spiking Neural Networks and Their Applications: A Review
Kashu Yamazaki 1 , Viet-Khoa Vo-Ho 1 , Darshan Bulsara 2 and Ngan Le 1, *
1

2

*

Citation: Yamazaki, K.; Vo-Ho, V.-K.;
Bulsara, D.; Le, N. Spiking Neural
Networks and Their Applications:

Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA; kyamazak@uark.edu (K.Y.); khoavoho@uark.edu (V.-K.V.-H.)
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA;
dbulsara@ucsd.edu
Correspondence: thile@uark.edu

Abstract: The past decade has witnessed the great success of deep neural networks in various domains. However, deep neural networks are very resource-intensive in terms of energy consumption,
data requirements, and high computational costs. With the recent increasing need for the autonomy
of machines in the real world, e.g., self-driving vehicles, drones, and collaborative robots, exploitation
of deep neural networks in those applications has been actively investigated. In those applications,
energy and computational efficiencies are especially important because of the need for real-time
responses and the limited energy supply. A promising solution to these previously infeasible applications has recently been given by biologically plausible spiking neural networks. Spiking neural
networks aim to bridge the gap between neuroscience and machine learning, using biologically
realistic models of neurons to carry out the computation. Due to their functional similarity to the
biological neural network, spiking neural networks can embrace the sparsity found in biology and
are highly compatible with temporal code. Our contributions in this work are: (i) we give a comprehensive review of theories of biological neurons; (ii) we present various existing spike-based
neuron models, which have been studied in neuroscience; (iii) we detail synapse models; (iv) we
provide a review of artificial neural networks; (v) we provide detailed guidance on how to train
spike-based neuron models; (vi) we revise available spike-based neuron frameworks that have been
developed to support implementing spiking neural networks; (vii) finally, we cover existing spiking
neural network applications in computer vision and robotics domains. The paper concludes with
discussions of future perspectives.

A Review. Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
brainsci12070863

Keywords: spiking neural networks; biological neural network; autonomous robot; robotics; computer vision; neuromorphic hardware; toolkits; survey; review

Academic Editor: Mauro Ursino
Received: 3 April 2022
Accepted: 13 June 2022
Published: 30 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed the growing abilities of artificial neural networks
(ANNs) from the first generation multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to the many state-of-the-art
techniques in the second generation deep neural networks (DNNs). This achievement
strongly depends on a large amount of annotated data and the widespread availability of
high-performance computing devices as well as the general-purpose Graphics Processing
Units (GPUs). Despite this great advancement, ANNs still lag behind the biological neural
networks in terms of energy efficiency and abilities for online learning. Many attempts
have been made to reduce the power consumption of traditional deep learning models.
In order to find more compact networks that can achieve similar performance with much
less complexity and a smaller number of parameters compared to the original network,
many techniques have been developed such as quantization [1], pruning [2], and knowledge distillation [3]. Quantization converts the weights and inputs of the network into
integer types, which makes the overall operations lighter than the floating-point operations.
In pruning, the connections of a network are iteratively removed during or after the training. To compress a neural network without dropping performance, knowledge distillation

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci12070863

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/brainsci

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

2 of 30

transfers complex knowledge learned by a heavy network called a teacher to a lightweight
network called a student.
Although ANNs/DNNs are historically brain-inspired, they are fundamentally different in structure, neural computations, and learning rules compared to the biological
neural network. This observation leads to the spiking neural networks (SNNs), which are
often referred to as the third generation of neural networks that could be a breakthrough
of bottlenecks of ANNs. Using SNNs on neuromorphic hardware, such as TrueNorth [4],
Loihi [5], SpiNNaker [6], NeuroGrid [7], etc., is worth mentioning and a promising approach to the energy consumption problem. In SNNs, such as in biological neural networks,
neurons communicate with each other with discrete electrical signals called spikes and
work in continuous time.
Due to their functional similarity to the biological neural networks, SNNs can embrace the sparsity found in biology and are highly compatible with temporal code [8].
Although SNNs still lag behind DNNs in terms of their performance, the gap is vanishing
on some tasks, while SNNs typically require much lower energy for the operation. However, SNNs are still difficult to train in general, mainly owing to their complex dynamics
of neurons and the non-differentiable nature of spike operations. A comparison between
biological neural networks, ANNs, and SNNs is given in Table 1. BP is backpropagation.
Table 1. A comparison of properties between biological neural networks, ANNs, and SNNs.
Properties

Biological NNs

ANNs

SNNs

Information Representation

Spikes

Scalars

Spikes

Learning Paradigm

Synaptic plasticity

BP

Plasticity/BP

Platform

Brain

VLSI

Neuromorphic VLSI

2. Biological Neurons
Neurons are the basic working units of the nervous system that process information by
propagating electrochemical signals through action potentials. Neurons are not electrically
neutral nor extracellular fluid because of the presence of ions within them. Ions are
constantly moving in and out of the cell through a membrane that can dynamically modify
its electric permeability with external electrochemical signals. The flux of ions entering and
exiting the cell causes a virtual current flow through the membrane, mostly ascribed to
Na+ , K+ , and Cl− ions.
Figure 1 shows a typical structure of a neuron with four main components: dendrites, soma, axon, and synapse. Dendrites are the short nervous termination that can be
considered as the input of the neuron. They translate the chemical signals carried by neurotransmitters released from the pre-synaptic neuron into electric signals. Soma is the cell
body where membrane potentials propagated from synaptic inputs are integrated, which
ultimately determines whether the post-synaptic cell fires action potentials before being
transmitted to the axon. This interaction of influences is called neural integration. Axon
carries the action potential towards other nerve cells. In order to rapidly carry the action
potential at long distances without attenuation, some axons are coated with a myelin sheath.
Synapses are the contact structure for information transfer that interconnect neurons in a
neural network. Synapses can be broadly divided into chemical and electrical synapses.
In chemical synapses, there is no direct contact between the pre- and post-synaptic neurons.
The signal from the pre-synaptic neuron is transmitted via neurotransmitters contained in
the synaptic granules released into the synaptic cleft. Neurotransmitters bind to receptors
in the post-synaptic cell, directly altering membrane potential or activating intracellular
secondary messengers to transmit the information. This type of transmission is slow but amplifies the signal and can make the effects of the incoming spike last longer. Chemical
synapses can be subdivided into excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Excitatory synapses
are synaptic connections that depolarize post-synaptic cells through synaptic transmission
and promote the firing of action potentials. Inhibitory synapses are synaptic connections that

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

3 of 30

hyperpolarize post-synaptic cells by synaptic transmission and inhibit the development of
action potentials. Glutamate and GABA are the most common excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmitters, respectively; ionotropic receptors for glutamate are AMPA and NMDA
and that of GABA are GABA A and GABA B [9]. Electrical synapses, on the other hand,
are structures that transmit membrane potential charges directly to the next neuron via
gap junctions on the contact membrane. This kind of communication is very rapid since
there are no chemical reactions within the transmission; however, there is no gain in signal
amplitude as in the chemical synapses.

neur
ot
r
ansmi
t
t
er
s
synapse

pr
esynapr
i
c
act
i
onpot
ent
i
al

axont
er
mi
nal
s

post
synapt
i
c
pot
ent
i
al
axon
dendr
i
t
es

myel
i
n
sheat
h

soma

Figure 1. A typical structure of a biological neuron and synapse.

2.1. Membrane Potential
The electric potential inside a cell with respect to the outside of the cell is called
the membrane potential. The membrane potential can be derived using the Goldman–
Hodgkin–Katz equation, which takes into consideration the relative permeability of the
plasma membrane to each ion in question.
vm =

RT
P [K + ]out + PNa [ Na+ ]out + PCl [Cl − ]in
ln K +
F
PK [K ]in + PNa [ Na+ ]in + PCl [Cl − ]out

(1)

where R is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature 310.15 (K) at human
body temperature (37 [◦ C]), F is the Faraday constant (=96, 485 (C· mol−1 )), ( A)out is the
extracellular concentration of ion A, and ( A)in is the intracellular concentration of ion A,
and PA is the membrane permeability for ion A, and for a typical neuron at rest, it is known
that PK :PNa :PCl = 1:0.04:0.45. In contrast, approximate relative permeability at the peak of
a typical neuronal action potential are PK :PNa :PCl = 1:12:0.45 [10].
2.1.1. Resting Membrane Potential
Due to the action of a number of proteins, ions are constantly moving in and out of
the cell. Although the influx of ions does not stop, charge transfer becomes apparently
immobile when the total charge of the outflowing ions and the total charge of the inflowing
ions per unit time becomes the same. The resting membrane potential of a cell is determined
by the net flow of ions through the “leak” channels that are open in the resting state. Based
on the relative membrane permeability for a typical neuron at rest, we can calculate the
resting membrane potential Em as follows:
RT
5.5PK + 135 × 0.04PK + 9 × 0.45PK
ln
F
150PK + 15 × 0.04PK + 125 × 0.45PK
= −70.15 [mV ]

Em =

(2)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

4 of 30

Since the reversal potential for Cl− ion is typically close to the resting membrane
potential, the Cl− ion is usually ignored when discussing a neuron’s resting membrane
potential.
2.1.2. Action Potential
When an action potential occurs, sodium channels on the axon are opened and Na+
ions are free to move in and out of the cell membrane. The membrane potential fluctuates
accordingly toward the reversal potential of the Na+ ion. The sodium channel is then
inactivated and closed, and now the potassium channel, which is potential-dependent, is
opened. Now, the membrane potential descends back toward the reversal potential of the
K+ ion and undershoots beyond the resting membrane potential Em .
RT
5.5PK + 135 × 12PK + 9 × 0.45PK
ln
F
150PK + 15 × 12PK + 125 × 0.45PK 0
= 38.43 [mV ]

v peak =

(3)

3. ANN Models
A rate-based neuron models the activity of a neuron only by the macroscopic feature,
firing rate r, regardless of the change in membrane potential or spike timing. The first
rate-coded artificial neuron, which is known as formal neuron or threshold logic unit, was
proposed by [11]. Based on the formal neuron, reference [12] introduced perceptron, using
the Heaviside step function as the activation function. These first-generation neurons fire
binary signals when the sum of incoming signals reaches a threshold of a neuron. This concept is later extended to utilize continuous activation functions, including the sigmoid [13]
or hyperbolic tangent function, to deal with analog inputs and outputs; consequently, this
enabled the training of the neural network through a powerful backpropagation algorithm
that exploits gradient-descent. Because of the proven ability of a sufficiently large neural
network of artificial neurons to approximate any analog function arbitrarily well (universal
approximation theorem states that a feed-forward network with a single hidden layer with a
finite number of neurons can approximate continuous functions, under assumptions on the
non-polynomial activation function [14,15]; Sigmoidal activation function and the ReLU are
also proved to follow the universal approximation theorem [16]), artificial neural networks
have been widely used as a powerful information-processing tool in machine learning.
In general, the discrete-time firing rate model can be formulated as r = σ (∑i wi,j x j ) and
usually grouped together for computational efficiency:
r = f (Wu + b)

(4)

where u ∈ R Npre is the firing rate of pre-synaptic neurons, r ∈ R Npost is the firing rate of
post-synaptic neurons, W ∈ R Npost × Npre is the weight matrix that represents the synaptic
strength between the pre- and post-synaptic neurons, b ∈ R Npost is the bias term, and f (·)
is the non-linear activation function.
Nowadays, Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [17] and its variants are commonly employed
as the non-linearity because they tend to show better convergence performance than the
sigmoidal activation function [18]. This formulation of the group of rate-based neurons is
often referred to as a fully-connected layer. The modern architecture of neural networks
stacks a variant of this layer to create very deep networks of neurons, which is often referred
to as deep neural networks (DNNs). Neural networks are typically called deep when they
have at least two hidden layers computing non-linear transformations of the input. One
of the commonly used building blocks of DNNs is a convolutional layer. A convolutional
layer is a special case of the fully connected layer that implements weight sharing for
processing data that has a known grid-like topology, e.g., images. Because of this inductive
bias, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [19,20] can utilize the spatial correlation of
the signal in a more sensible way. The representational properties of early layers in the
CNNs are similar to the response properties of neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1),

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

5 of 30

which is the first cortical area in the visual hierarchy of the primate’s brain. CNNs possess
two key properties that make them extremely useful for image applications: spatially
shared weights and spatial pooling. This kind of network learns features that are shiftinvariant, i.e., filters that are useful across the entire image (due to the fact that image
statistics are stationary). The pooling layers are responsible for reducing the sensitivity of
the output to slight input-shift and distortions and increasing the reception field for later
layers. Since 2012, one of the most notable results in deep learning is the use of CNNs to
obtain a remarkable improvement in the ImageNet classification challenge [21,22]. Based
on this technological breakthrough in image classification, various improvements have
been proposed for the network architectures in vision models [23–25]. Although ANNs
have been remarkably successful in many applications, including object detection [26,27],
image segmentation [28–30], and action recognition [31,32], they are still limited in the way
they deal with temporal information.
4. SNN Models
The ability to simultaneously record the activity of multiple cells has led to the idea
that the time difference between spikes in different neurons and the spike timing itself can
have functional significance. Since the firing rate model cannot handle the problem of this
perspective, a model describing the timing of spikes and the variation of the sub-threshold
membrane potential has been investigated. A model that handles the generation of such
spikes is distinguished from the firing rate model and called the spiking model. Such neuron
models are generally expressed in the form of ordinary differential equations. Figure 2
depicts the differences between the biological neuron, artificial neuron, and spiking neuron.
Dendrite

Structure of
biological neuron

Soma

Axon
Synapse

Axon from pre-neuron
Synapse

ANN

Dendrite
Output axon
to post-neuron

...

Axon from pre-neuron

SNN

1 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 Synapse

Dendrite
0 0101100
Output axon
to post-neuron

...

Figure 2. A comparison between the biological neuron, artificial neuron, and spiking neuron.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

6 of 30

4.1. Spiking Neuron Models
A variety of spiking neuron models have been proposed, and they display tradeoffs between biological accuracy and computational feasibility (Figure 3). Choosing an
appropriate model depends on the user requirements. Spike-based neuron models are
reviewed regarding the computational efficiency and biological plausibility in [33]. In this
section, several models of spiking neurons are presented.

Figure 3. A comparison of spiking neuron models in terms of implementation cost and biological
plausibility (adopted from [33]).

4.1.1. Hodgkin–Huxley (HH) Model
Hodgkin and Huxley conducted the experiment on the giant axon of a squid and
concluded that two types of ion channels, K+ channel and Na+ channel, are involved in
the generation of the action potential [34]. This model can be expressed by adding two
terms that take care of the behavior of those two ion channels to Equation (9). Although
the change in permeability of the ion channel is actually due to the structural change of
the protein, it can be described phenomenologically by the analogy of opening and closing
the gates.
dvm (t)
Cm
= Iion (t) + Isyn (t)
(5)
dt
Iion (t) = GK n4 (vm − EK ) + GNa m3 h(vm − ENa ) + GL (vm − EL )

(6)

where Cm is membrane capacitance (pF), vm is the membrane potential (mV), Isyn is synaptic
input current (pA), GK represents conductance of K+ ion, EK represents reversal potential
of K+ ion, GNa represents conductance of Na+ ion, ENa represents reversal potential of
Na+ ion, GL represents leak conductance, and EL represents leak reversal potential, which
is now thought to be a Cl− ion’s reversal potential. n, m, and h are dimensionless quantities
between zero and one that are associated with potassium channel activation, sodium
channel activation, and sodium channel inactivation, respectively.
The three gates, n, m, and h, are described by the following differential equation,
where g represents the gating variables n, m, and h, and the transition rate (where α g (v) is
the transition rate from non-permissive to permissive states, whereas β g (v) is the transition
rate from permissive to non-permissive states) for each gate α g (v) and β g (v) are defined in
Equation (8) (in neural simulation software packages, the rate constants in Hodgkin–Huxley
A+ Bvm
models are often parameterized using a generic functional form [35]:
vm + D ).
C + H exp(

dg
= α g (vm )(1 − g) − β g (vm ) g
dt

F

)

(7)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

7 of 30

0.1(25−v )

m
αm (vm ) = exp((25−v )/10
)−1
m

β m (vm ) = 4 exp(−vm /18)
αh (vm ) = 0.07 exp(−vm /20)
β h (vm ) = exp((30−v1 )/10)+1

(8)

m

0.01(10−vm )
αn (vm ) = exp((10−v )/10
)−1
m

β n (vm ) = 0.125 exp(−vm /80)
By solving these equations, the Hodgkin–Huxley model can simulate the membrane
potential behavior during spike generation without introducing spike generation procedures presented in the LIF model (Equation (10)). Although the Hodgkin–Huxley model
is biologically accurate (the model is limited in the way that it only describes the channels and flow of ions in the neuron when generating spikes; several drawbacks have
been pointed out [36,37]), it demands large computational resources and is infeasible in
large-scale simulations.
4.1.2. Leaky Integrate and Fire (LIF) Model
The model in which the input current is integrated over time until the membrane
potential reaches a threshold without taking into account the biological ion channel behavior
is called the integrate-and-fire (IF) model. The leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) model reflects
the diffusion of ions that occurs through the membrane when some equilibrium is not
reached in the cell by introducing a “leak” term to the IF model. Because of its simplicity
and low computational cost, the LIF model and its variants are one of the widely used
instances of the spiking neuron model. The model dynamics are represented by the
following equation:
dvm
= − GL (vm − EL ) + Isyn (t)
dt
vm ≥ vθ , vm ← v peak then vm ← vreset
Cm

if

(9)

where vθ is the threshold voltage, v peak is the action potential, and vreset is the resetting
membrane potential. When the voltage reaches the threshold vθ , usually one is used for
simplicity, the neuron fires the spike, and then the voltage is reset to zero for a refractory
period τre f that limits the firing frequency of a neuron.
When the synaptic input current is constant (Isyn (t) = I) and vreset = 0, we can solve
for the membrane potential as follows:



t
vm (t) = Rm I 1 − exp −
(10)
τm
where Rm is the membrane resistance (MΩ), τm = Rm Cm is the membrane time constant.
Since the neuron fires the spike when the membrane potential reaches the threshold, the first
spike time t(1) can be found by setting vm (t) = vθ :
t(1) = τm ln

Rm I
Rm I − vθ

(11)

Therefore, steady-state firing rate can be found as:

f =

Rm I
τre f + τm ln
Rm I − vθ

 −1
(12)

Theoretically, it is possible to train a deep neural network using Equation (12) as
the static non-linearity and make a reasonable approximation of the network in spiking

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

8 of 30

neurons [38]. Intuitively, especially when τre f = 0, τm = 1, Rm = 1, and vθ = 1, the firing
rate of the neuron corresponding to the input current behaves similar to the ReLU activation
function in ANNs. This feature is often utilized for ANN-to-SNN conversion.
4.1.3. Izhikevich Model
Izhikevich proposed a model that combines the biological plausibility of the HH
model’s dynamics and the computational efficiency of the LIF neurons [39]. The model is
represented by the two-dimensional (2D) system of ordinary differential equations, and the
Izhikevich model [40] can be expressed in the following form:
Cm

dvm
= k(vm − EL )(vm − vt ) − u + Isyn (t)
dt

du(t)
= a(b(vm − Em ) − u)
dt
with the auxiliary after-spike resetting

if vm ≥ vθ then

vm ← c
u ← u+d

(13)
(14)

(15)

where u represents the activation of K+ ionic currents and inactivation of Na+ ionic currents
(pA), and vt is the instantaneous threshold potential (mV).
The Izhikevich model can exhibit the firing patterns of all known types of cortical
neurons with the choice of parameters based on [40].
4.1.4. Adaptive Exponential Integrate-and-Fire (AdEx) Model
The aforementioned Izhikevich neuron can be considered to be an adaptive quadratic
integrate-and-fire model, whereas the adaptive exponential integrate-and-fire (AdEx)
model [41] has an exponential voltage dependence, coupled with a slow variable, which
models threshold adaptation as follows:
Cm

dvm
= − GL (vm − EL )
dt
vm − v T
+ GL ∆ T exp
− w + Isyn
∆T

(16)

dw
= a(vm − EL ) − w
dt

(17)

τw
with reset conditions


if vm ≥ vθ then

vm ← vreset
w ← w+b

(18)

where w is the slow variable taking into account adaptation, VT is the rheobase current, ∆ T
models the sharpness of the Na+ channels’ activation function.
The LIF model can be obtained from the AdEx model by taking the limit ∆ T → 0 and
removing the adaptation current w. The AdEx model shares the ability to reproduce firing
patterns at a low computational cost such as the Izhikevich neuron.
4.2. Synaptic Models
A synaptic interaction can be modeled as a process of binding a neurotransmitter
to a closed receptor, which consequently opens it, and unbinding the transmitter from
the receptor closing it. These can be modeled as a rate of ion channel opening or a
variation of the conductance, as in the Hodgkin–Huxley model. Synaptic kinetics is defined
by the number of neurotransmitters released from the pre-synaptic cell, the number of
neurotransmitters bonded to the post-synaptic cell, or the opening rate of the ion channel

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

9 of 30

of the post-synaptic cell. The following models are used to model the post-synaptic current
(PSC) as well as the post-synaptic potential (PSP).
4.2.1. Single Exponential Model
Assuming the binding of neurotransmitters is instantaneous, the behavior of PSC can
be modeled as an exponential decay with a time constant. This can be modeled as:


−(t − tk )
f (t) = exp
τd
(19)
ssyn (t) = ∑ f (t − tk )
tk <t

where ssyn is synaptic kinetics, tk is the kth spike occurrence timing, and τd is synaptic
decay time constant.
The previous equation can be expressed in a differential equation form:
ssyn
dssyn
1
=−
+
δ(t − tk )
dt
τd
τd t∑
<t

(20)

k

where δ(·) is the Dirac delta function that represents the occurrence of a spike.
4.2.2. Double Exponential Model
While ignoring the physiological process, the double exponential model reproduces
the behavior of the post-synaptic current (PSC) well, considering not only decay but the
rise of the PSC.





t
t
f (t) = A exp −
− exp −
τd
τr
(21)
  τr
τd
τr τr −τd
A=
τd − τr τd
where A is the normalizing constant and τr is the synaptic rising time constant.
The double exponential model can be expressed in a form of differential equations
as follows:
dssyn
ssyn
+h
=−
dt
τd
dh
h
1
=− +
δ(t − tk )
dt
τr
τr τd t∑
<t

(22)

k

where h is the helping variable. When τ = τd = τr , Equation (21) is called the alpha
function With these synaptic models, the input current to the cell Isyn can be expressed as
follows if we consider ssyn as the pre-synaptic kinetics:
Isyn (t) = Wssyn (t)

(23)

where ssyn ∈ R Npre , Isyn ∈ R Npost is synaptic input of post-synaptic neurons, and W ∈
R Npost × Npre is the weight matrix that represents the synaptic strength between the pre- and
post-synaptic neurons.
5. SNN Learning Mechanisms
Learning in neural networks involves the modification of the connectivity of neurons.
Unlike the ANNs, which can be successfully trained by stochastic gradient descent and
backpropagation, SNNs still do not have solid training methods. The native training
methods of SNNs can be classified into: supervised learning with gradient descent and

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

10 of 30

spike backpropagation, unsupervised learning with local learning rule at the synapse
(e.g., spike-time-dependent plasticity), and reinforcement learning with reward/error
signal using reward modulated plasticity. Synaptic plasticity is the biological process by
which specific patterns of synaptic activity result in changes in synaptic strength. Synaptic
plasticity was first proposed as a mechanism for learning and memory on the basis of
theoretical analysis by [42]. Although the local learning rule at the synapse is said to
be biologically more plausible, the learning performance is usually lower than that of
supervised learning. An alternative approach to indirectly train the SNNs is the conversion
of ANNs to SNNs [43]. Among those methods, state-of-the-art results are mostly obtained
from the model conversion from ANNs.
5.1. Spike-Based Backpropagation
Similar to the backpropagation algorithm for ANNs, SpikeProp [44] is designed to
determine a set of the desired firing timings of all output neurons at the post-synaptic
neurons for a given set of the input pattern. Event-based methods, including SpikeProp,
have the derivative term defined only around the firing time, whereas [45–47] ignore
the temporal effect of the spike signal. Reference [48] proposed an improved method
of SpikeProp called SuperSpike that utilizes the derivative of the membrane potential
instead of the spike, which allows training a model with an absence of spike occurrence.
SuperSpike uses the van Rossum distance [49] between the output and desired spike trains
as the loss function, while SpikeProp uses the sum-squared error. The following shows the
loss function for the network in time interval t ∈ [0, T ].
L=

1
2

Z T
0

(α × (s(t) − ŝ(t)))2 dt

(24)

where α is a normalized smooth temporal convolution kernel, s is the output spike train,
and ŝ is a target spike train. Here, spike train is represented as s(t) = ∑tk <t δ(t − tk ).
When calculating the derivative of Equation (24) with respect to the synaptic weights,
∂s
the problematic term ∂w
that contains the Dirac delta function appears. In order to avoid
this term, the spike train is approximated with a continuous auxiliary function of the
membrane potential of the LIF model.
∂s
∂σ (vm )
∂vm
≈
= σ0 (vm )
∂w
∂w
∂w

(25)

m
where σ ( x ) = x/(1 + | x |) represents a fast sigmoid. Here we further approximate ∂v
∂w ≈
e × s with a normalized smooth temporal convolution kernel e.

∂L
=
∂w

Z T
0

α × (s − ŝ) α × (σ0 (vm )(e × s pre ))dt

(26)

where the α × (s − ŝ) is an error signal and α × (σ0 (vm )(e × s pre )) is a synaptic eligibility trace.
SLAYER [50] distributes the credit of error back in time in order to solve the drawback
of event-based methods. SLAYER assumes a stochastic spiking neuron approximation
for the IF model with a refractory response and can simultaneously learn both synaptic
weights and axonal delays.
∂L
=
∂w

Z T
0

ρ(t)(α

e)(α × s pre )dt

(27)

where ρ(t) is the probability density function that could be formulated with the spike
escape rate function [51], represents the element-wise correlation in time, and e is the
backpropagation estimate of error.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

11 of 30

5.2. Spike-Time-Dependent Plasticity (STDP)
Spike-time-dependent plasticity (STDP) is an unsupervised Hebbian learning mechanism, which adjusts synaptic weight based on the temporal order of the pre- and postsynaptic spikes [52,53]. When the pre-synaptic spike arrives before a post-synaptic spike,
the synaptic weight is increased, which is known as long-term potential (LTP). If the arrival
timing of the synaptic spike is reversed, the synaptic weight is decreased, which is known
as long-term depression (LTD).



 A+ exp t pre −t post
if t pre ≤ t post
 τ+

(28)
∆w =
t
−
t
pre
post
− A− exp −
if t pre > t post
τ−
Equation (28) suggests that the synaptic strength can be increased or decreased infinitely, which is biologically unrealistic and makes learning unstable. Biological neurons
have a capacity to regulate their own excitability relative to network activity by decreasing
the strength of each synapse so that the relative synaptic weighting of each synapse is
preserved [54]. This phenomenon is called homeostatic scaling and can be implemented by
making A± weight dependent. With the following exponential rule, the magnitude of the
weight modification is regularized according to the current synaptic weight.
(
A+ (w) = η+ exp(winit − w)
(29)
A− (w) = η− exp(w − winit )
Here, η± are learning rates that take small positive values, and winit refers to the initial
weight of the synapse (sometimes this term is dropped).
In terms of biology as well as the implementation, it is infeasible to remember all
the times of spike occurrence, as seen in Equation (28). This is where the spike trace
x is introduced:
dw
= A+ x pre · δpost − A− x post · δpre
(30)
dt
dx pre
x pre (t)
=−
+ δ(t)
dt
τ+
dx post
x post (t)
=−
+ δ(t)
dt
τ−

(31)

where τ+ and τ− are the time constants. Figure 4 shows the response of a spike trace and
corresponding weight modifications based on STDP. The spike trace x pre can be interpreted
as an opening rate of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor and x post as Ca2+ influx
through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels activated by a backpropagating action potential
(bAP). This multiplicative STDP implementation that is inherently stable by combining
the weight-dependent exponential rule with spike trace information is often referred to as
stable STDP (S-STDP) [55].

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

12 of 30

Figure 4. Weight change in two neurons based on STDP learning rule.

In the following subsections, we will review various STDP variants.
5.2.1. Anti-Hebbian STDP (aSTDP)
Although STDP-like synaptic weight modifications have been found in various neuronal systems, all the systems do not follow the STDP rule. Synapses between parallel fibers
and Purkinje-cells in the cerebellum-like structure, for example, follow an anti-Hebbian
temporal order [56]. The anti-Hebbian STDP (aSTDP) shows the opposite dependence
on the relative timing of pre-synaptic input and the post-synaptic spike compared to
STDP. With aSTDP, pre-synaptic activity occurring before post-synaptic activity leads to
depression, and vice versa. The aSTDP rule is given:



 A+ exp − t pre −t post
if t pre > t post
τ
+


∆w =
(32)
− A− exp t pre −t post
if t pre ≤ t post
τ−
Compared to the standard STDP, the directions of the greater than/less than signs is
opposite, and the magnitude of the learning rate could be different from that for STDP.
5.2.2. Mirrored STDP (mSTDP)
Mirrored STDP was introduced as an effort to implement autoencoders in a biologically
realistic fashion [57]. mSTDP combines STDP and aSTDP for feedforward and feedback
connections of a two-layer autoencoder such that feedforward and feedback learning
is symmetric. This learning rule accounts for high LTP correlation with no causality.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

13 of 30

However, the biological plausibility is limited because it neglects the causality underlined
by Hebb [42].
5.2.3. Probabilistic STDP
A probabilistic variant of simplified STDP [58] that adjusts the synaptic weight for
LTP according to an exponential function of the current weight magnitude was introduced
by [59]. Probabilistic STDP shows the robustness in performance regardless of a complexity
in the spiking neuron model, i.e., non-leaky IF neurons and Izhikevich-like neurons.
(
η+ exp(−w) if t pre ≤ t post
∆w =
(33)
− η−
if t pre > t post
5.2.4. Reward Modulated STDP (R-STDP)
While STDP operates based upon the correlation between the spike timings of the
pre- and post-synaptic neurons, a reward signal is introduced to modulate STDP in order
to implement a reinforcement learning mechanism. If the reward is positive, the corresponding synapse is potentiated; otherwise, the corresponding synapse is depressed.
According to [60], dopaminergic neurons are characterized as having two different firing
patterns. In the absence of any stimulus, they exhibit a slow (1–8 Hz) firing rate, known
as background firing. When stimulated, the dopaminergic neurons exhibit burst firing.
Burst firing is where neurons fire in very rapid bursts, followed by a period of inactivity.
The modulation is conducted by introducing an eligibility trace z for pre- and post-synaptic
spike occurrence as follows:
dw
= ηr (t)zi,j (t)
(34)
dt
zi,j (t)
dzi,j
=−
+ STDP(t)
dt
τ

(35)

where r (t) is the reward given at time t, z is the eligibility trace.
5.3. Prescribed Error Sensitivity (PES)
Prescribed error sensitivity (PES) is a supervised learning rule suited for online learning for adaptive control that learns a function by minimizing an external error signal
frequently used with the neural engineering framework (NEF) [61]. This rule has been
used for many works, including a biologically detailed neural model of hierarchical reinforcement learning [62] and adoptive control of quadcopter flight [63]. The weight update
for this rule is defined as follows:
∆w = ηe(t) a
(36)
where e(t) is an error signal at time t, and a is the rate activity of each neuron.
5.4. Intrinsic Plasticity
The intensity of an average synaptic input in the brain may change dramatically.
Neurons maintain responsiveness to both small and large synaptic inputs by regulating
intrinsic excitability to promote stable firing. This way, neuronal activity can keep from
falling silent or saturating when the average synaptic input falls extremely low or rises
significantly high. Intrinsic plasticity (IP) regulates the firing rate of a neuron within an
appropriate range [64,65]. The firing rate entropy can be influenced by the neuron’s intrinsic
properties. By changing these intrinsic properties, the neuron can achieve the optimal firing
rate distribution.

τmin −∆t ISI

−η exp( τmin )
φ = η exp( ∆t ISIτ −τmax )
max


0

if ∆t ISI < Tmin
if ∆t ISI > Tmax
otherwise

(37)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

14 of 30

b ← b + bmax · φ

(38)

where η is a learning rate, Tmin and Tmax are thresholds that determine the desired range of
inter-spike interval (ISI) represented as ∆t ISI .
During the training, the most recent ISI is examined and neuronal excitability is adjusted. When ISI is larger than the threshold Tmax , the neuronal excitability is strengthened
to make the neuron more sensitive to input stimuli, and if ISI is less than the threshold Tmin ,
the neuronal excitability is weakened to make the neuron less sensitive to input stimuli.
5.5. ANN-to-SNN Conversion
Most ANN-to-SNN conversion methods have focused on converting ReLU to IF
neurons. Reference [43] proposed an ANN-to-SNN conversion method that neglects bias
and max-pooling. In subsequent work, reference [66] proposed data-based normalization
to improve the performance in deep SNNs. Reference [67] presented conversion methods of
batch normalization and spike max-pooling. Reference [68] expanded conversion methods
to VGG and residual architectures. One core hypothesis of several ANN-to-SNN conversion
designs is that the heavy computational cost of existing ANNs results from the continual
transmission of real-valued activities between connected nodes in the network, as well
as the subsequent matrix multiplication or convolution [69]. As a result, implementing
ANN-to-SNN conversion may enable the same information transmission and function
but decrease the costs of signal transmission and computation. Binary-valued spikes both
reduce the number of bits per transmission by turning real-valued signals into binary ones,
and they make signals sparse in time by not transmitting information for each connection
every timestep. These ANN-to-SNN conversion methods are based on the idea of importing
pre-trained parameters (e.g., weights and biases) from an ANN to an SNN. ANN-to-SNN
conversion methods have achieved comparable results in deep SNNs to those of original
ANNs (e.g., VGG and ResNet) and can be considered as a solution to the energy-efficiency
problem of ANNs in the deployment time.
6. Spike Encoding
Since SNNs utilize the spike and spike sequences to convey the information, encoding
real data into spikes is a substantial step in creating SNNs. Although the way information is
encoded into spikes in biology is one of the biggest unresolved challenges in neuroscience.
Two main encoding schemes, rate encoding and temporal (pulse) encoding, can be found in
many kinds of literature. In addition, it is noteworthy that some sensors, such as Dynamic
Vision Sensor (DVS), can produce raw spike sequences.
6.1. Rate Encoding
The rate encoding scheme is based on the average number of spikes over time; information is encoded with a number of spikes generated over a time window. Depending on
the different averaging schemes, there are several ways to define the firing rate, such as an
average over time or an average over several repetitions.
n=

Z T
0

dt δ(t − tk )

(39)

where T is the time window, and tk is the time of spike occurrence. Then, the firing rate r
can be expressed as:
n
r=
(40)
T
This firing rate can be used as an input for rate-base neuron models, i.e., ANNs, where
the activation function represents the frequency–current (FI) curve.
The firing rate can also be utilized to model the discrete spikes with the point process.
In the Poisson process, which is one of the point processes, the probability of the random
variable N (t) being equal to n, i.e., when the probability of a point occurring follows a

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

15 of 30

Poisson distribution with intensity λ, the probability of a spike occurring n times by time
(λt)n
t, is given by: P{ N (t) = n} = n! e−λt . Then, the single spike occurrence during a short
time step ∆t is:
P{ N (∆t) = 1} = λ∆t(e−λ∆t ) ≃ λ∆t + o (∆t)
(41)
where the e−λ∆t term is approximated with the McLaughlin expansion.
When encoding an image into spike sequence, we can assume each pixel value corresponds to the firing rate r, and following Equation (41), spike occurrence for each time step
t can be obtained as:

1 if ξ ∼ U (0, 1) < r∆t
s=
(42)
0
otherwise
6.2. Temporal Encoding
The temporal encoding scheme is based on the exact timing of spikes, where the more
salient information is encoded as earlier spike times. Compared to the rate encoding scheme,
temporal encoding produces much sparser spikes since the spike-timing rather than the
spike-frequency represents information. Although the temporal code allows representing
the features of the input with small groups of neurons, it contains a vulnerability to input
noise or temporal jitter.
When encoding an image, each individual pixel value ranging from 0 to 255 can be
simply used to produce the spike time that is proportional to the brightness of the pixel.
For instance, a pixel with normalized brightness of 0.1 corresponds to a spike time at t = 0.1.
In a grayscale image, white pixels (brightness equals 1 or 255) do not cause spikes, as it can
be considered that they do not carry any information.
7. SNNs in Computer Vision
SNNs have been a driving factor in the development of many modern computer
vision and other signal processing techniques. The application of SNNs is gradually
being considered in computer vision where data consisting of temporal information is
handled or where the saving of computational resources is aimed. The former case often
involves the use of an event camera or LiDAR sensor whose data has importance in
the temporal dimension. The latter case often focuses on the conversion of ANNs into
SNNs so that deep neural network models can embrace the energy-efficient operations of
neuromorphic hardware.
Although some studies have shown SNNs can be used for image classification on
large datasets such as ImageNet [38,67,68], most applications of SNNs are still limited to
less complex datasets such as MNIST [70], N-MNIST [71], and N-Caltech101 [71]. One
of the primary reasons for the limited application scope is the complex dynamics and
non-differentiable operations of spiking neurons. Recently, some remarkable studies have
applied SNNs for object detection tasks [72–74], showing comparative results with DNNs
while requiring much less energy for the computations. Following the successes of the
ANNs to SNNs conversion methods on image classification and object detection tasks, reference [75] leveraged SiamFC [76] and introduced SiamSNN, a spike-based Siamese network
for object tracking. Recently, UNet-based SNN in [69] leveraged the Nengo framework to
translate a simplified U-Net into a spiking network to deploy on the Intel Loihi neuromorphic chip. The UNet-based SNN model is implemented with two frameworks: TensorFlow
and NengoDL [77]. Furthermore, a partitioning algorithm, which minimizes inter-chip
communication resulting in a faster and more energy-efficient network, is proposed in [69]
to deploy SNN on Loihi.
Unlike frame-based cameras, event-based cameras are often referred to as bio-inspired
silicon retinas. However, event-based cameras require a high temporal resolution (in the
order of microseconds) and a fraction of power consumption. The combination of spiking
neural networks and event-based vision sensors holds the potential of highly efficient
and high-bandwidth optical flow estimation [55]. Reference [78] proposed Spike-FlowNet,

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

16 of 30

a deep hybrid neural network architecture integrating SNNs and ANNs for efficiently
estimating optical flow from sparse event camera outputs without sacrificing performance.
To illustrate how to implement an SNN framework for computer vision, we choose
the task of image classification with the DCSNN network [79]. The overall structure of
DCSNN for digit recognition is shown in Figure 5. The input image is convolved with
six different Gaussian (DoG) filters at various scales with zero padding. Window sizes
are set to 3 × 3, 7 × 7, and 13 × 13, where their standard deviations (σ1, σ2) are (3/9, 6/9),
(7/9, 14/9), and (13/9, 26/9), respectively. Then, a spike is generated and propagated to
the next layer by an intensity-to-latency encoding [80]. From the output of the DoG filters,
all the values below 50 are ignored and the remaining values are descendingly sorted,
denoting the order of spike propagation. Generated spikes are processed through three
spiking convolution-then-pooling layers (S1–C1, S2–C2, and S3–C3). The convolutional
layer (S-layer) contains several 2-dimensional grids of IF neurons, which constitute the
feature maps. All S-layers are trainable, employing either STDP or R-STDP learning rules.
The C-layer has the same number of feature maps as its previous S-layer, and there is a
one-to-one association between maps of the two layers. There are two types of C-layers:
spike-based and potential-based. The network makes its decision in C3, where neurons are
pre-assigned to digits, and the decision is the digit assigned to the neuron with either the
maximum internal potential or the earliest spike time. When the decision of the network
has been made, it will be compared with the original label of the input image. By using the
R-STDP rule for synaptic plasticity, a reward or punishment will be generated depending
on if the decision and ground truth label match or mismatch [67].

Figure 5. The overall structure of DCSNN for digit recognition. Courtesy of [79].

Table 2 summarizes the use of SNNs in the field of computer vision.
8. SNNs in Robotic Control
Mobile robots with continuous high-dimensional observation and action spaces are
increasingly being deployed to solve complex real-world tasks. Given their limited onboard energy resources, there is an unmet need to design energy-efficient solutions for the
continuous control of these autonomous robots.
Biology shows that the event-based paradigm is applicable not just to perception and
inference but also to control. Spiking neural networks have been utilized as a “brain” of
robots that provides robotic perception and action to mimic the behaviors captured in
nature. Most commonly, the utilization of SNNs in robotic applications involves handcrafting and tuning for the task of interest. Many fields of robotics, e.g., locomotor systems,
have been inspired by biological systems. Nowadays, several methods have been proposed
to achieve locomotion in a variety of robots, which is known as a central pattern generator
(CPG). CPG is a neural network in which interconnected excitatory and inhibitory neurons

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

17 of 30

produce an oscillatory, rhythmic output without some rhythmic inputs. Most of the current
research explores ANNs based on non-spiking neurons, but there is a growing body
of research on SNNs. Reference [81] presented the first implementation of a real-time
neuromorphic spiking CPG (sCPG) that runs on the SpiNNaker to command a hexapod
robot to perform a walk, trot, or run motion. Reference [82] implemented sCPG with
an AdEx neuron model that exhibits a tripod-like gait. Their model can manipulate
the amplitude, frequency, and phase while the network is running, indicating that these
characteristics can be updated in an online manner to further explore the role of sensory
feedback in shaping locomotion.
In robotics, the lamprey has often been used as a model for understanding the role of
CPG in locomotion. The lamprey swims by propagating a mechanical wave, transmitted
along the body. Reference [83] proposed to implement a sCPG using an analog/digital VLSI
device interfaced with an FPGA board, which can be directly interfaced to the actuators
of a bio-mimetic robotic lamprey. Reference [84] used the sCPG model implemented in
Nengo to produce the swimming gaits modulated by the high-level brainstem control of a
simulated lamprey robot model in various scenarios. They showed that the robot can be
controlled dynamically in direction and pace by modifying the input to the network.
Inspired by the success of SNNs on event-based cameras, reference [85] proposed, for
the very first time, a fully embedded application of the Loihi neuromorphic chip prototype
in a flying robot to bridge the gap between simulation and the real world. In this work,
the SNN architecture is evolved in a highly randomized and abstracted vertical simulation
and takes the ventral optic flow divergence as its input to determine the thrust setpoint to
achieve a smooth landing. Focusing on proportional, integral, derivative (PID) controller
in neuromorphic hardware, reference [86] improved the work in [87] and proposed an
event-based PID controller to improve the PID controller on Loihi. In [86], they re-designed
the integral path of the controller to cope with a limited resolution of value representation,
which led to fast saturation of the I-path. Then, they simplified the network, removing the
inner control loop and simplified the network, removing the inner control loop.
In addition to a pattern generator and motor control, navigation is an important task
in robotics. With the requirement of energy efficiency in simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM), which is crucial for mobile robots exploring unknown environments,
SNN is an appropriate solution. Reference [88] proposed a biologically constrained SNN architecture to solve the unidimensional SLAM problem on Loihi. In [88], the robot’s heading
is determined via spike-based recursive Bayesian inference of multisensory cues (i.e., visual
and odometry information). Reference [89] demonstrated a model of rat hippocampus
place, grid, and border cells implemented with the SpiNNaker. The implemented place
cells were used to represent the location of landmarks for “home” and “cheese”, whereas
the grid cells provide displacement information to the robot. They showed that the robot
can detect these landmarks correctly. Reference [90] presented a brain-like navigation
system with LIF neurons trained by STDP. In this work, reference [90] shows that SNN may
robustly control an autonomous robot in mapping and exploring an unknown environment,
while compensating for its own intrinsic hardware imperfections, such as partial or total
loss of visual input. Reference [91] proposed a variant of deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG), called spiking deep deterministic policy gradient (SDDPG), which consists of a
spiking actor network and a deep critic network that were trained jointly using gradient
descent for energy-efficient mapless navigation. This work explored an indirect SNN training approach based on the reward-modulated spike-timing-dependent plasticity (R-STDP)
learning rule and supervised learning framework. The model was validated with Turtlebot2 platform and Intel’s Kapoho-Bay USB chipset. The authors claimed that the proposed
method performed slightly better than the state-of-the-art thanks to the generalization
introduced by the Poisson spike encoding of the state input.
In this category, we will introduce [88] as an instance to show how SNNs are used in
robotics. The model has two sensory spike rate-encoders and five sub-networks, as shown
in Figure 6. The odometry sensor and the RGB-depth camera signals drive the neural

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

18 of 30

activity of speed cells and sensory neurons encoding the angular speed and the distance to
the nearest object, respectively. With five sub-networks, Head Direction (HD) receives the
input from the speed cells and plays the role of the heading of the robot; Reference Frame
Transformation (RFT) receives the egocentric input from sensory neurons and generates
the allocentric distance representation in the world reference frame (defined by the HD
network); Distance Mapping (DM) learns the allocentric observations from the RFT and
forms a map of the robot’s surrounding environment; Observation Likelihood (OL) uses
the map from the DM to compute the observation likelihood distribution of the robot’s
heading based on the egocentric observation from sensory neurons; Bayesian Inference
(BI) produces a near-optimal posterior of the robot’s heading and corrects the heading
representation within the HD.

Figure 6. The overall structure of SNN architecture for SLAM. Courtesy of [88].

Table 3 summarizes the use of SNNs in the field of robotics.
9. Available Software Frameworks
The steadily increasing interest in SNN has led to many attempts to develop SNN
libraries for Python. Unlike ANNs, the objectives in SNNs are time consumption and
energy efficiency. To provide functional systems for researchers to execute applications that
are designed with SNNs, several software frameworks have been proposed to provide SNN
platforms. We provide a list of open-source software frameworks for the SNN simulation
with some emphasis on the relation with deep learning frameworks in Table 4.
10. Conclusions and Future Perspectives
In this paper, we present a review of the fundamentals of spiking neural networks
(SNNs) and provide a survey of the literature on the use of SNNs in computer vision
and robotics applications, which demonstrates the great potential of SNNs in the research
community. Over the past decade, SNNs have gained huge attention and shown they

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

19 of 30

are promising in temporal information processing capability, low power consumption,
and high biological plausibility. However, realizing the full potential of SNNs requires
solving several challenges ahead of us.
•

•

•

Training of SNNs: There are two main approaches to train SNNs: (i) training SNNs directly based on either supervised learning with gradient descent or unsupervised learning with STDP (ii) convert a pre-trained ANN to an SNN model. The first approach
has the problem of gradient vanishing or explosion because of a non-differentiable
spiking signal. Furthermore, an SNN trained by gradient descent is restricted to
shallow architectures and produces low performance on large-scale datasets such as
ImageNet. The second approach increases the computational complexity because of
the large number of timesteps, even though these SNNs achieve comparable accuracy
to ANNs, due to the similarity between SNNs and recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
and results in backpropagation through time (BPTT). Recently, reference [92] showed
that RTRL, an online algorithm to compute gradients in RNNs, can be combined with
an LIP neuron to provide good performance with a low memory footprint.
SNNs Architecture: While the majority of existing works on SNNs have focused on
the image classification problem and utilize available ANN architectures such as
VGG or Resnet, having an appropriate SNN architecture is critical. Recently, metalearning such as neural architecture search (NAS) has been utilized to find the best
SNN architecture [93].
SNNs Performance on Large-scale Data: While SNNs have shown an impressive advantage with regard to energy efficiency, their accuracy performances are still low compared to ANNs on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet. Recently, references [94–96]
utilized the huge success of ResNet in ANNs to train deep SNNs with residual learning
on ImageNet.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

20 of 30

Table 2. Summary of recent applications of SNNs in computer vision.

Method
Year
Image Classification

Training
Paradigm

DCSNN [79] (2018)

STDP and RSTDP

LM-SNNs [97] 2020

STDP

Zhou et al. [98] (2020)

STDP

Zhou et al. [99] (2020)

R-STDP

Lou et al. [100] (2020)

STDP

Description
A convolutional SNN was trained by a combination of STDP for
the lower layers and reward-modulated STDP for the higher ones,
which allows training the entire network in a biologically plausible
way in an end-to-end fashion.
Lattice map spiking neural network (LM-SNN) model with modified STDP learning rule and biological inspired decision-making
mechanism was introduced. Learning algorithm in LM-SNN manifests an unsupervised learning scheme.
First work to apply SNNs to a medical image classification task. Utilized an STDP-based convolutional SNN to distinguish melanoma
from melanocytic nevi.
An imbalanced reward coefficient was introduced for the R-STDP
learning rule to set the reward from the minority class to be higher
than that of the majority class and to set the class-dependent rewards
according to the data statistic of the training dataset.
Both temporal and spatial characteristics of SNN are employed for
recognizing EEG signals and classifying emotion states. Both spatial
and temporal neuroinformatic data to be encoded with synapse and
neuron locations as well as timing of the spiking activities.

Performance

They have achieved 97.2% accuracy on the MNIST
dataset.
https://github.com/miladmozafari/
SpykeTorch (accessed on 5 September 2021)
Dataset: MNIST handwritten digits and a collection of
snapshots of Atari Breakout.
Dataset: ISIC 2018 [74] includes 1113 images of MEL
and 6705 images of NV. Performance: Without feature
selection: 83.8% With feature selection: 87.7%
Dataset: ISIC 2018. Performance: classification rate of the
minority class from 0.774 to 0.966, and the classification
rate of the majority class is also improved from 0.984 to
0.993.
74%, 78%, 80% and 86.27% for the DEAP dataset, and the
overall accuracy is 96.67% for the SEED dataset

Object Detection
Spiking YOLO [73]
(2019)

Deep SCNN
(2020)

[74]

ANN-to-SNN Conversion

Backpropagation

Spiking-YOLO was presented for the first kind to perform energyefficient object detection. They proposed channel-wise normalization and signed neuron with imbalanced threshold to convert leakyReLU in a biologically plausible way.
SNN based on the Complex-YOLO was applied on 3D point-cloud
data acquired from a LiDAR sensor by converting them into spike
time data. The SNN model proposed in the article utilized the IF neuron in spike time form (such as the one presented in Equation (11))
trained with ordinary backpropagation.

They have achieved mAP% 51.83 on PASCAL VOC and
mAP% 25.66 on MS COCO
They obtained comparative results on the KITTI dataset
with bird’s-eye view compared to Complex-YOLO with
fewer energy requirements. Mean sparsity of 56.24%
and extremely low total energy consumption of 0.247 mJ
only.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

21 of 30

Table 2. Cont.

Method
Year
Image Classification

FSHNN [101] (2021)

Training
Paradigm

STDP & SGD

Description

Performance

Monte Carlo dropout methodology is adopted to quantify uncertainty for FSHNN and used to discriminate true positives from
false positives.

FSHNN provides better accuracy compared to ANNbased object detectors (on MSCOCO dataset) while being
more energy-efficient. Features from both unsupervised
STDP-based learning and supervised backpropagationbased learning are fused. It also outperforms ANN,
when subjected to noisy input data and less labeled training data with a lower uncertainty error.

Object Tracking
SiamSNN [75] (2020)

Two multi-layered
SNNs [102] (2020)

ANN-to-SNN Conversion

R-STDP

SiamSNN, the first SNN for object tracking that achieves short
latency and low precision loss of the original SiamFC was introduced along with an optimized hybrid similarity estimation method
for SNN.
This addressed the issue of SNN-based moving-target tracking on a
wheel-less snake robot. A Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) is utilized
to perceive the target and encode it as spikes that are fed into the
SNN to drive the locomotion controller of the snake robot.

OTB-2013, OTB-2015, and VOT2016. SiamSNN achieves
50 FPS and extremely low energy consumption on
TrueNorth.
The simulation experiments conducted in the NRP. Compared to SNN, the relative direction of the target to
the robot is with less fluctuation when using the multilayered SNN.

Object Segmentation

Unet-based SNN [69]
(2021)

ANN-to-SNN Conversion

SpikeMS [103] (2021)

Backpropagation

Chen et al. [104]
(2021)

ANN-to-SNN
version

con-

Instead of using a fixed firing rate target for all neurons on all examples, Unet-based SNN regularizes a rank-based statistic computed
across a neuron’s firing rates on multiple examples to allow a range
of firing rates. Unet-based SNN also proposes the percentile-based
loss function to regularize the (almost) maximum firing rate of each
neuron across all examples. During the forward pass, it uses a
modification of the ReLU non-linearity
SpikeMS includes spike counts and classification labels to address
the problem of motion segmentation using the event-based DVS
camera as input
Temporal redundancy between adjacent frames is capitalized to
propose an interval reset method where the network state is reset
after a fixed number of frames.

Even achieve lower accuracy performance (92.13%) compared to Unet baseline (94.98% on Tensorflow and 92.81%
on NengoDL) on the ISBI 2D EM Segmentation dataset,
Unet-based SNN runs on the Loihi neuromorphic hardware with greater energy efficiency.
SpikeMS achieves performance comparable to an ANN
method but with 50× less power consumption on EVIMO, EED and MOD datasets.
It achieved a 35.7× increase in convergence speed with
only 1.5% accuracy drop using an interval reset of 20
frame

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

22 of 30

Table 2. Cont.

Method
Year
Image Classification
SpikeSEG
(2021)

[105]

Training
Paradigm

Description

Performance

STDP & backpropagation

This is a spiking fully convolutional neural network used for semantic event-based image segmentation through the use of active
pixel saliency mapping. Both spike-based imaging and spike-based
processing are utilized to deliver fast and accurate class segmented
spiking images.

The SpikeSEG network performs well on the synthetic
dataset with accuracy values of 97% and mIoU of 74%

Stable STDP

The selectivity of the local and global motion of the visual scene
emerges through STDP from event-based stimuli. The input statistics of event-based sensors are handled by an adaptive spiking
neuron model. The neuron is learnt by the proposed stable STDP.
The neuron model and STDP rule are combined in a hierarchical
SNN architecture to capture geometric features, identify the local
motion of these features, and integrate this information into a global
ego-motion estimate.

It is evaluated on synthetic and real event sequences with
the Event Camera Dataset on DAVIS and SEES1 DVS
sensors. Code available: https://github.com/tudelft/
cuSNN (accessed on 4 September 2021)

Backpropagation

Spike-FlowNet, a deep hybrid neural network, integrating SNNs
and ANNs for efficiently estimating optical flow from sparse event
camera outputs without sacrificing the performance was proposed.
They trained the IF neuron with spike-base backpropagation.

Backpropagation

STaRFlow is a lightweight CNN for multi-frame optical flow estimation with occlusion handling. Temporal information is exploited by
temporal recurrence, where the same weights over a scale recurrence
are repeatedly used.

Optical-Flow Estimation

Hierarchical
cuSNN [55] (2019)

Spike-FlowNet [78]
(2020)

STaRFlow
(2021)

[106]

On the MVSEC dataset, Spike-FlowNet accurately predicts the optical flow from discrete and asynchronous
event streams along with substantial benefits in terms of
computational efficiency compared to the corresponding
ANN architecture. Code available: https://github.com/
chan8972/Spike-FlowNet (accessed on 27 August 2021)
STaRFlow obtains SOTA performances on MPI Sintel and
Kitti2015 and involves significantly fewer parameters.
Code available: https://github.com/pgodet/star_flow
(accessed on 5 September 2021)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

23 of 30

Table 3. Summary of recent applications of SNNs in robotics.
Method
Year
Pattern Generation
CuevasArteaga et al. [107]
(2017)

Software/
Hardware

Description

PyNN/
SpiNNaker

Spiking CPG (sCPG) to command a hexapod robot to perform walk, trot,
or run.

NeuroPod [81] (2019)

-/SpiNNaker

Strohmer et al. [82]
(2020)

NEST/-

Donati et al. [83] (2014)

Angelidis et al. [84]
(2021)

The first implementation of a real-time neuromorphic sCPG that runs on
the SpiNNaker to command a hexapod robot to perform walk, trot, or run.
An sCPG with AdEx neuron model that exhibits a tripod-like gait. Their
model can manipulate the amplitude, frequency, and phase while the network is running, indicating that these characteristics can be updated in an
online manner to further explore the role of sensory feedback in shaping
locomotion.

-/FPGA

Implement an sCPG using analog/digital VLSI device interfaced with
an FPGA board, which can be directly interfaced to the actuators of a
bio-mimetic robotic lamprey. CPG network is implemented using silicon
neurons and synapses with biologically plausible time constants.

Nengo/
SpiNNaker

Used the sCPG model implemented in Nengo to produce the swimming
gaits modulated by the high-level brainstem control of a simulated lamprey
robot model in various scenarios. They showed that the robot can be
controlled dynamically in direction and pace by modifying the input to the
network.

Performance

The robot was based on the design from https://www.thingiverse.
com/thing:1021540 (accessed on 5 September 2021)
A validation test was performed on the Modular Robot Framework
(MORF), and source code is available at: https://gitlab.com/esrl/
scpg-network-simulation (accessed on 4 September 2021)
The neuromorphic chip can reproduce the behavior of the theoretical CPG model, offering the possibility of directly controling the
actuators of an artificial bio-inspired lamprey robot. The neuron
produces periodic bursting, lasting approximately 60 ms, with an
inter-burst interval of about 1.5 s. The spiking frequency during
the burst is about 35 Hz.
The experiments are conducted on an isolated CPG model and
neuromechanical simulations. It provides a vast number of possible synchronized gaits, e.g., traveling and standing waves, and
smoothly controls a lamprey robot that, with regulation of the
high-level drive, adapts to various simulation scenarios. On neuromorphic hardware, it achieves real-time operation.

Motor Control

Dupeyroux et al. [85]
(2020)

PySNN/Loihi

This is a fully embedded application of the Loihi neuromorphic chip prototype in a flying robot. It uses an evolutionary algorithm to optimize SNN
controllers and an abstracted simulation environment for evaluation.

The resulting network architecture consists of only 35 neurons
distributed among three layers. Quantitative analysis between
simulation and Loihi reveals a root-mean-square error of the thrust
setpoint as low as 0.005 g, along with a 99.8% matching of the spike
sequences in the hidden layer and 99.7% in the output layer. Videos
of the flight tests can be found at https://mavlab.tudelft.nl/loihi/
(accessed on 5 September 2021)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

24 of 30

Table 3. Cont.
Method
Year

Stagsted et al. [86]
(2020)

Software/
Hardware

Description

Performance

Nengo/Loihi

By modifying SNN architecture and improving the interface between neuromorphic cores and the host computer allowed, it improves the latency
and frequency of the controller. The integral path of the controller was redesigned to cope with a limited resolution of value representation. The inner control loop was removed to simplify the network, and the time step
duration of the control loop was decreased to improve the I/O interface.

SNN-based proportional, integral, derivative (PID) controller was
tested on a drone constrained to rotate on a single axis. They
achieved comparable performance for overshoot, rise and settling
times.

Navigation
Spiking RatSLAM [89]
(2012)

Spatial Envelope
Synthesis (SES)

Gridbot [90] (2018)

ROS/-

Bing et al. [108] (2019)

-/Kapoho-Bay USB
chipset

It demonstrates a model of rat hippocampus place, grid, and border cells
implemented with the SpiNNaker. The implemented place cells were used
to represent the location of landmarks for “home” and “cheese” whereas
the grid cells provide displacement information to the robot. They showed
that the robot can detect these landmarks correctly.
Gridbot is an autonomously moving robot with 1321 spiking neurons and
is able to map the environment by itself. Gridbot contains neurons that
were modeled as LIF units; synapses that were either hardwired or underwent plastic changes through STDP, dendritic trees that integrated synaptic
inputs. Gridbot encoded sensory information into distributed maps and
generated motor commands to control the robot movement.
It is a fast method to build an SNN-based controller for performing robotic
implementations by using a model-based control method to shape a desired
behavior of the robot as a dataset and then use it to train an SNN based on
supervised learning.

Tang et al. [88] (2019)

Gazebo/-

The model has two sensory spike rate-encoders and five sub-networks (head
direction, reference frame transformation, distance mapping, observation
likelihood, Bayesian inference). All five sub-networks are integrated, and
the model has intrinsic asynchronous parallelism by incorporating spiking
neurons, multi-compartmental dendritic trees, and plastic synapses, all of
which are supported by Loihi.

SDDPG [91] (2020)

PyTroch/-

Spiking deep deterministic policy gradient (SDDPG), which consists of a
spiking actor network and a deep critic network that were trained jointly
using gradient descent for energy-efficient mapless navigation.

Place cells represent the location of landmarks for “home” and
“cheese”, while Grid cells provide displacement information to the
robot. The experiment shows that that robot is correctly able to
detect these landmarks http://neuromorphs.net/nm/wiki/act12/
results/Combined (accessed on 5 September 2021)
Three experiments: follow the walls of the environment for 30 min;
explored the environment randomly; the robot walked through the
learned environment for more than 2 h

It performed slightly better than the state-of-the-art thanks to generalization introduced by Poisson spike encoding of the state input
A mobile robot is equipped with an RGB-depth camera, in both
the AprilTag real-world and Gazebo simulator, for validating our
method. It is validated for accuracy and energy-efficiency in both
real- world and simulated environments by comparing with the
GMapping algorithm. It consumes 100 times less energy than
GMapping run on a CPU while having comparable accuracy in the
head direction localization and map-generation.
The model was validated with Turtlebot2 platform and Intel’s Kapoho-Bay USB chipset. https://github.com/combra-lab/
spiking-ddpg-mapless-navigation (accessed on 6 September 2021)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

25 of 30

Table 4. List of available software frameworks for SNNs simulation.

Framework

Training
Paradigm

Description

SNN simulator
Brain2 [109]

STDP

Nest [110]

STDP/RSTDP

Nengo [111]

STDP
PES

Nengo DL [77]

ANN conversion

SpykeTorch [113]

STDP/RSTDP

BindsNet [115]
Slayer PyTorch [116]
Norse

STDP/RSTDP
ANN conversion
BP
BPTT
RSNN

snn_toolbox [67]

ANN conversion

GeNN [117]

SNN

PySNN

STDP

CARLsim [118,119]

STP
STDP

Auryn [120]

STDP

Brian2 is a widely-used open-source simulator for spiking neural networks. https://opensourcelibs.com/lib/brian2 (accessed
on 6 September 2021)
Nest focuses on the dynamics and structure of neural systems, and it is used in medical/biological applications but maps poorly
to large datasets and deep learning.
Neural simulator for large-scale neural networks based on the neural engineering framework (NEF), which is a large-scale
modeling approach that can leverage single neuron models to build neural networks.
NengoDL allows users to construct biologically detailed neural models, intermixed with deep-learning elements bucked by
TensorFlow and Keras [112].
SpykeTorch is based on PyTorch [114] and simulates convolutional SNNs with at most one spike per neuron and the rank-order
encoding scheme.
BindsNet is also based on PyTorch targeting machine-learning tasks. Currently, synapses are implemented without their own
dynamics.
Slayer PyTorch provides solutions for the temporal credit problem of spiking neurons that allows backpropagation of errors.
Norse is an expansion of PyTorch to perform deep learning with spiking neural networks using sparse and event-driven hardware and
data. Used in long short-term spiking neural networks (Bellec 2018). https://github.com/norse/norse (accessed on 7 September 2021)
SNN toolbox is used to transform rate-based ANNs defined in different deep-learning frameworks, such as TensorFlow, PyTorch,
etc., into SNNs and provides an interface to several backends for simulation (pyNN, Brian2, etc.) or deployment (SpiNNaker,
Loihi). https://github.com/NeuromorphicProcessorProject/snn_toolbox (accessed on 7 September 2021)
GeNN provides an interface for simulating SNNs on NVIDIA GPUs by generating model-driven and hardware-specific C/C++
CUDA code. https://genn-team.github.io/ (accessed on 7 September 2021)
PySNN focuses on having an efficient simulation of SNN on both CPU and GPU. Written on top of PyTorch to achieve this.
https://github.com/BasBuller/PySNN (accessed on 7 September 2021)
CARLsim allows th euser to simulate large-scale SNNs using multiple GPUs and CPU cores concurrently. The simulator provides
a PyNN-like programming interface in C/C++, which allows for details and parameters to be specified at the synapse, neuron,
and network level. https://github.com/UCI-CARL/CARLsim5 (accessed on 4 September 2021)
Auyrn is a simulator for a recurrent spiking neural network with synaptic plasticity. https://github.com/fzenke/auryn (accessed
on 5 September 2021)

SNN-based brain simulator
Neucube [121]

STDP

FNS [122]

STDP

NeuCube is the development environment and a computational architecture for the creation of brain-like artificial intelligence.
https://kedri.aut.ac.nz/R-and-D-Systems/neucube (accessed on 4 September 2021)
FNS is an event-driven spiking neural network framework oriented to data-driven brain simulations. https://www.
fnsneuralsimulator.org/ (accessed on 6 September 2021)

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

26 of 30

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.Y., V.-K.V.-H., D.B. and N.L.; Review and editing, K.Y.,
V.-K.V.-H. and N.L.; Formal analysis, D.B. and N.L.; project Administration, N.L. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This material is based upon work supported in part by the Engineering Research and
Innovation Seed Funding Program (ERISF), US National Science Foundation, under Award No.
OIA-1946391, NSF 1920920.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Zhang, D.; Yang, J.; Ye, D.; Hua, G. Lq-nets: Learned quantization for highly accurate and compact deep neural networks. In
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8–14 September 2018; pp. 365–382.
Li, G.; Qian, C.; Jiang, C.; Lu, X.; Tang, K. Optimization based Layer-wise Magnitude-based Pruning for DNN Compression. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Stockholm, Sweden, 13–19 July 2018;
pp. 2383–2389.
Jin, X.; Peng, B.; Wu, Y.; Liu, Y.; Liu, J.; Liang, D.; Yan, J.; Hu, X. Knowledge distillation via route constrained optimization.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, Seoul, Korea, 27 October–2 November 2019;
pp. 1345–1354.
Merolla, P.A.; Arthur, J.V.; Alvarez-Icaza, R.; Cassidy, A.S.; Sawada, J.; Akopyan, F.; Jackson, B.L.; Imam, N.; Guo, C.; Nakamura, Y.;
et al. A million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface. Science 2014, 345, 668–673.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Davies, M.; Srinivasa, N.; Lin, T.; Chinya, G.; Cao, Y.; Choday, S.H.; Dimou, G.; Joshi, P.; Imam, N.; Jain, S.; et al. Loihi: A
Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-Chip Learning. IEEE Micro 2018, 38, 82–99. [CrossRef]
Furber, S.B.; Galluppi, F.; Temple, S.; Plana, L.A. The SpiNNaker Project. Proc. IEEE 2014, 102, 652–665. [CrossRef]
Benjamin, B.V.; Gao, P.; McQuinn, E.; Choudhary, S.; Chandrasekaran, A.R.; Bussat, J.; Alvarez-Icaza, R.; Arthur, J.V.; Merolla,
P.A.; Boahen, K. Neurogrid: A Mixed-Analog-Digital Multichip System for Large-Scale Neural Simulations. Proc. IEEE 2014,
102, 699–716. [CrossRef]
Kasabov, N.K. Time-Space, Spiking Neural Networks and Brain-Inspired Artificial Intelligence; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2019.
Dayan, P.; Abbott, L.F. Theoretical Neuroscience: Computational and Mathematical Modeling of Neural Systems; The MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2005.
Strickholm, A. Ionic permeability of K, Na, and Cl in potassium-depolarized nerve. Dependency on pH, cooperative effects, and
action of tetrodotoxin. Biophys. J. 1981, 35, 677—697. [CrossRef]
Mcculloch, W.; Pitts, W. A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 1943, 5, 127–147.
[CrossRef]
Rosenblatt, F. The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain. Psychol. Rev. 1958,
65, 386–408. [CrossRef]
Han, J.; Moraga, C. The influence of the sigmoid function parameters on the speed of backpropagation learning. In From Natural
to Artificial Neural Computation; Mira, J., Sandoval, F., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1995; pp. 195–201.
Cybenko, G. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Math. Control. Signals, Syst. (MCSS) 1989, 2, 303–314.
[CrossRef]
Leshno, M.; Lin, V.; Pinkus, A.; Schocken, S. Multilayer feedforward networks with a nonpolynomial activation function can
approximate any function. Neural Netw. 1993, 6, 861–867. [CrossRef]
Sonoda, S.; Murata, N. Neural Network with Unbounded Activation Functions is Universal Approximator. arXiv 2015,
arXiv:1505.03654.
Nair, V.; Hinton, G. Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Machines. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, Haifa, Israel, 21–24 June 2010; pp. 807–814.
Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Hinton, G. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. Commun. ACM 2017,
60, 84–90. [CrossRef]
LeCun, Y.; Touresky, D.; Hinton, G.; Sejnowski, T. A theoretical framework for back-propagation. In Proceedings of the 1988
Connectionist Models Summer School, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 17–26 June 1988; pp. 21–28.
LeCun, Y.; Bottou, L.; Orr, G.B.; Müller, K.R. Efficient backprop. In Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 1998; pp. 9–50.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

27 of 30

Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.J.; Li, K.; Fei-Fei, L. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of
the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Miami, FL, USA, 20–25 June 2009; pp. 248–255.
Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Hinton, G.E. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of
the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Lake Tahoe, AL, USA, 3–6 December 2012; pp. 1097–1105.
Simonyan, K.; Zisserman, A. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Learning Representations, San Diego, CA, USA, 7–9 May 2015.
He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1512.03385.
Szegedy, C.; Vanhoucke, V.; Ioffe, S.; Shlens, J.; Wojna, Z. Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision. arXiv 2015,
arXiv:1512.00567.
Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection. arXiv 2015,
arXiv:1506.02640.
Ren, S.; He, K.; Girshick, R.; Sun, J. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks. arXiv
2015, arXiv:1506.01497.
Long, J.; Shelhamer, E.; Darrell, T. Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation. arXiv 2014, arXiv:1411.4038.
Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P.; Brox, T. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. arXiv 2015,
arXiv:1505.04597.
He, K.; Gkioxari, G.; Dollár, P.; Girshick, R. Mask R-CNN. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1703.06870.
Feichtenhofer, C.; Fan, H.; Malik, J.; He, K. Slowfast networks for video recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, Seoul, Korea, 27 October–2 November 2019; pp. 6202–6211.
Fan, Y.; Lu, X.; Li, D.; Liu, Y. Video-based emotion recognition using CNN-RNN and C3D hybrid networks. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, Tokyo, Japan, 12–16 November 2016; pp. 445–450.
Izhikevich, E.M. Which model to use for cortical spiking neurons? IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2004, 15, 1063–1070. [CrossRef]
Hodgkin, L.; Huxley, F. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J. Physiol. 1952, 117, 500–544. [CrossRef]
Nelson, M. Electrophysiological Models. In Databasing the Brain: From Data to Knowledge; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 2005;
pp. 285–301.
Meunier, C.; Segev, I. Playing the Devil’s advocate: Is the Hodgkin–Huxley model useful? Trends Neurosci. 2002, 25, 558–563.
[CrossRef]
Strassberg, A.; DeFelice, L. Limitations of the Hodgkin-Huxley Formalism: Effects of Single Channel Kinetics on Transmembrane
Voltage Dynamics. Neural Comput. 1993, 5, 843–855. [CrossRef]
Hunsberger, E.; Eliasmith, C. Training Spiking Deep Networks for Neuromorphic Hardware. arXiv 2016, arXiv:1611.05141.
Izhikevich, E. Simple model of Spiking Neurons. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2003, 14, 1569–1572. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Izhikevich, E. Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience: The Geometry of Excitability and Bursting; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2007.
Brette, R.; Gerstner, W. Adaptive Exponential Integrate-and-Fire Model as an Effective Description of Neuronal Activity. J.
Neurophysiol. 2005, 94, 3637–3642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Hebb, D.O. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1949.
Cao, Y.; Chen, Y.; Khosla, D. Spiking Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Energy-Efficient Object Recognition. Int. J.
Comput. Vis. 2015, 113, 54–66. [CrossRef]
Bohte, S.; Kok, J.; Poutré, J. SpikeProp: Backpropagation for Networks of Spiking Neurons. In Proceedings of the 8th European
Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, ESANN 2000, Bruges, Belgium, 26–28 April 2000; Volume 48, pp. 419–424.
Sporea, I.; Grüning, A. Supervised Learning in Multilayer Spiking Neural Networks. arXiv 2012, arXiv:1202.2249.
Panda, P.; Roy, K. Unsupervised Regenerative Learning of Hierarchical Features in Spiking Deep Networks for Object Recognition.
arXiv 2016, arXiv:1602.01510.
Lee, J.H.; Delbruck, T.; Pfeiffer, M. Training Deep Spiking Neural Networks Using Backpropagation. Front. Neurosci. 2016, 10, 508.
[CrossRef]
Zenke, F.; Ganguli, S. SuperSpike: Supervised learning in multi-layer spiking neural networks. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1705.11146.
van Rossum, M. A Novel Spike Distance. Neural Comput. 2001, 13, 751–763. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bam Shrestha, S.; Orchard, G. SLAYER: Spike Layer Error Reassignment in Time. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1810.08646.
Gerstner, W.; Kistler, W.M. Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neurons, Populations, Plasticity; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
UK, 2002.
Bi, G.; Poo, M. Synaptic Modifications in Cultured Hippocampal Neurons: Dependence on Spike Timing, Synaptic Strength, and
Postsynaptic Cell Type. J. Neurosci. 1998, 18, 10464–10472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Song, S.; Miller, K.; Abbott, L. Competitive Hebbian learning through spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity. Nat. Neurosci.
2000, 3, 919–926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Siddoway, B.; Hou, H.; Xia, H. Molecular mechanisms of homeostatic synaptic downscaling. Neuropharmacology 2014, 78, 38–44.
[CrossRef]
Paredes-Vallés, F.; Scheper, K.Y.W.; de Croon, G.C.H.E. Unsupervised Learning of a Hierarchical Spiking Neural Network for
Optical Flow Estimation: From Events to Global Motion Perception. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1807.10936.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.

84.

28 of 30

Bell, C.; Han, V.; Sugawara, Y.; Grant, K. Synaptic plasticity in a cerebellum-like structure depends on temporal order. Nature
1997, 387, 278–281. [CrossRef]
Burbank, K.S. Mirrored STDP Implements Autoencoder Learning in a Network of Spiking Neurons. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2015, 11,
e1004566. [CrossRef]
Masquelier, T.; Thorpe, S.J. Unsupervised Learning of Visual Features through Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 2007, 3, e31. [CrossRef]
Tavanaei, A.; Masquelier, T.; Maida, A.S. Acquisition of Visual Features Through Probabilistic Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity.
arXiv 2016, arXiv:1606.01102.
Izhikevich, E. Solving the Distal Reward Problem through Linkage of STDP and Dopamine Signaling. Cereb. Cortex 2007,
17, 2443–2452. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bekolay, T.; Kolbeck, C.; Eliasmith, C. Simultaneous Unsupervised and Supervised Learning of Cognitive Functions in Biologically
Plausible Spiking Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Berlin, Germany,
31 July–3 August 2013; pp. 169–174.
Rasmussen, D.; Eliasmith, C. A neural model of hierarchical reinforcement learning. PLoS ONE 2014, 12, e0180234. [CrossRef]
Komer, B. Biologically Inspired Adaptive Control of Quadcopter Flight. Master’s Thesis, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada, 2015.
Stemmler, M.; Koch, C. How voltage-dependent conductances can adapt to maximize the information encoded by neuronal
firing rate. Nat. Neurosci. 1999, 2, 521–527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Li, X.; Wang, W.; Xue, F.; Song, Y. Computational modeling of spiking neural network with learning rules from STDP and intrinsic
plasticity. Phys. A Stat. Mech. Its Appl. 2018, 491, 716–728. [CrossRef]
Diehl, P.; Neil, D.; Binas, J.; Cook, M.; Liu, S.C.; Pfeiffer, M. Fast-Classifying, High-Accuracy Spiking Deep Networks Through
Weight and Threshold Balancing. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
Killarney, Ireland, 12–17 July 2015. [CrossRef]
Rueckauer, B.; Lungu, I.A.; Hu, Y.; Pfeiffer, M.; Liu, S.C. Conversion of Continuous-Valued Deep Networks to Efficient
Event-Driven Networks for Image Classification. Front. Neurosci. 2017, 11, 682. [CrossRef]
Sengupta, A.; Ye, Y.; Wang, R.; Liu, C.; Roy, K. Going Deeper in Spiking Neural Networks: VGG and Residual Architectures.
Front. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Patel, K.; Hunsberger, E.; Batir, S.; Eliasmith, C. A spiking neural network for image segmentation. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2106.08921.
LeCun, Y.; Bottou, L.; Bengio, Y.; Haffner, P. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE 1998,
86, 2278–2324. [CrossRef]
Orchard, G.; Jayawant, A.; Cohen, G.K.; Thakor, N. Converting static image datasets to spiking neuromorphic datasets using
saccades. Front. Neurosci. 2015, 9, 437. [CrossRef]
Kheradpisheh, S.R.; Ganjtabesh, M.; Thorpe, S.J.; Masquelier, T. STDP-based spiking deep convolutional neural networks for
object recognition. Neural Netw. 2018, 99, 56–67. [CrossRef]
Kim, S.; Park, S.; Na, B.; Yoon, S. Spiking-YOLO: Spiking Neural Network for Energy-Efficient Object Detection. arXiv 2019,
arXiv:1903.06530.
Zhou, S.; Chen, Y.; Li, X.; Sanyal, A. Deep SCNN-Based Real-Time Object Detection for Self-Driving Vehicles Using LiDAR
Temporal Data. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 76903–76912. [CrossRef]
Luo, Y.; Xu, M.; Yuan, C.; Cao, X.; Xu, Y.; Wang, T.; Feng, Q. SiamSNN: Spike-based Siamese Network for Energy-Efficient and
Real-time Object Tracking. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2003.07584.
Bertinetto, L.; Valmadre, J.; Henriques, J.F.; Vedaldi, A.; Torr, P.H. Fully-convolutional siamese networks for object tracking. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 8–16 October 2016; pp. 850–865.
Rasmussen, D. NengoDL: Combining deep learning and neuromorphic modelling methods. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1805.11144.
Lee, C.; Kosta, A.K.; Zihao Zhu, A.; Chaney, K.; Daniilidis, K.; Roy, K. Spike-FlowNet: Event-based Optical Flow Estimation with
Energy-Efficient Hybrid Neural Networks. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2003.06696.
Mozafari, M.; Ganjtabesh, M.; Nowzari-Dalini, A.; Thorpe, S.J.; Masquelier, T. Bio-inspired digit recognition using rewardmodulated spike-timing-dependent plasticity in deep convolutional networks. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1804.00227.
Gautrais, J.; Thorpe, S. Rate coding versus temporal order coding: A theoretical approach. Biosystems 1998, 48, 57–65. [CrossRef]
Gutierrez-Galan, D.; Dominguez-Morales, J.P.; Perez-Pena, F.; Linares-Barranco, A. NeuroPod: A real-time neuromorphic spiking
CPG applied to robotics. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1904.11243.
Strohmer, B.; Manoonpong, P.; Larsen, L.B. Flexible Spiking CPGs for Online Manipulation During Hexapod Walking. Front.
Neurorobot. 2020, 14, 41. [CrossRef]
Donati, E.; Corradi, F.; Stefanini, C.; Indiveri, G. A spiking implementation of the lamprey’s Central Pattern Generator
in neuromorphic VLSI. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), Lausanne,
Switzerland, 22–24 October 2014; pp. 512–515.
Angelidis, E.; Buchholz, E.; Arreguit O’Neil, J.P.; Rougè, A.; Stewart, T.; von Arnim, A.; Knoll, A.; Ijspeert, A. A Spiking Central
Pattern Generator for the control of a simulated lamprey robot running on SpiNNaker and Loihi neuromorphic boards. arXiv
2021, arXiv:2101.07001.

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

85.

29 of 30

Dupeyroux, J.; Hagenaars, J.; Paredes-Vallés, F.; de Croon, G. Neuromorphic control for optic-flow-based landings of MAVs using
the Loihi processor. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2011.00534.
86. Stagsted, R.K.; Vitale, A.; Renner, A.; Larsen, L.B.; Christensen, A.L.; Sandamirskaya, Y. Event-based PID controller fully realized
in neuromorphic hardware: A one DoF study. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 24 October 2020–24 January 2021; pp. 10939–10944. [CrossRef]
87. Stagsted, R.; Vitale, A.; Binz, J.; Bonde Larsen, L.; Sandamirskaya, Y. Towards neuromorphic control: A spiking neural network
based PID controller for UAV. In Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and Systems 2020, Corvalis, OR, USA, 12–16 July 2020.
88. Tang, G.; Shah, A.; Michmizos, K.P. Spiking Neural Network on Neuromorphic Hardware for Energy-Efficient Unidimensional
SLAM. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1903.02504.
89. Galluppi, F.; Conradt, J.; Stewart, T.; Eliasmith, C.; Horiuchi, T.; Tapson, J.; Tripp, B.; Furber, S.; Etienne-Cummings, R. Live Demo:
Spiking ratSLAM: Rat hippocampus cells in spiking neural hardware. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and
Systems Conference (BioCAS), Hsinchu, Taiwan, 28–30 November 2012; p. 91. [CrossRef]
90. Tang, G.; Michmizos, K.P. Gridbot: An autonomous robot controlled by a Spiking Neural Network mimicking the brain’s
navigational system. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1807.02155.
91. Tang, G.; Kumar, N.; Michmizos, K.P. Reinforcement co-Learning of Deep and Spiking Neural Networks for Energy-Efficient
Mapless Navigation with Neuromorphic Hardware. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2003.01157.
92. He, W.; Wu, Y.; Deng, L.; Li, G.; Wang, H.; Tian, Y.; Ding, W.; Wang, W.; Xie, Y. Comparing SNNs and RNNs on neuromorphic
vision datasets: Similarities and differences. Neural Netw. 2020, 132, 108–120. [CrossRef]
93. Kim, Y.; Li, Y.; Park, H.; Venkatesha, Y.; Panda, P. Neural Architecture Search for Spiking Neural Networks. arXiv 2022,
arXiv:2201.10355.
94. Han, B.; Srinivasan, G.; Roy, K. Rmp-snn: Residual membrane potential neuron for enabling deeper high-accuracy and lowlatency spiking neural network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Seattle, WA, USA, 13–19 June 2020; pp. 13558–13567.
95. Li, Y.; Deng, S.; Dong, X.; Gong, R.; Gu, S. A free lunch from ANN: Towards efficient, accurate spiking neural networks calibration.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Virtual, 18–24 July 2021; pp. 6316–6325.
96. Fang, W.; Yu, Z.; Chen, Y.; Huang, T.; Masquelier, T.; Tian, Y. Deep residual learning in spiking neural networks. In Proceedings
of the 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Virtual, 6–14 December 2021; Volume 34.
97. Hazan, H.; Saunders, D.J.; Sanghavi, D.T.; Siegelmann, H.; Kozma, R. Lattice map spiking neural networks (LM-SNNs) for
clustering and classifying image data. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 2020, 88, 1237–1260. [CrossRef]
98. Zhou, Q.; Shi, Y.; Xu, Z.; Qu, R.; Xu, G. Classifying Melanoma Skin Lesions Using Convolutional Spiking Neural Networks with
Unsupervised STDP Learning Rule. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 101309–101319. [CrossRef]
99. Zhou, Q.; Ren, C.; Qi, S. An Imbalanced R-STDP Learning Rule in Spiking Neural Networks for Medical Image Classification.
IEEE Access 2020, 8, 224162–224177. [CrossRef]
100. Luo, Y.; Fu, Q.; Xie, J.; Qin, Y.; Wu, G.; Liu, J.; Jiang, F.; Cao, Y.; Ding, X. EEG-Based Emotion Classification Using Spiking Neural
Networks. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 46007–46016. [CrossRef]
101. Chakraborty, B.; She, X.; Mukhopadhyay, S. A Fully Spiking Hybrid Neural Network for Energy-Efficient Object Detection. arXiv
2021, arXiv:2104.10719.
102. Jiang, Z.; Otto, R.; Bing, Z.; Huang, K.; Knoll, A. Target Tracking Control of a Wheel-less Snake Robot Based on a Supervised
Multi-layered SNN. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
Las Vegas, NV, USA, 24 October 2020–24 January 2021; pp. 7124–7130.
103. Parameshwara, C.M.; Li, S.; Fermüller, C.; Sanket, N.J.; Evanusa, M.S.; Aloimonos, Y. SpikeMS: Deep Spiking Neural Network for
Motion Segmentation. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2105.06562.
104. Chen, Q.; Rueckauer, B.; Li, L.; Delbruck, T.; Liu, S.C. Reducing Latency in a Converted Spiking Video Segmentation Network. In
Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Daegu, Korea, 22–28 May 2021; pp. 1–5.
105. Kirkland, P.; Di Caterina, G.; Soraghan, J.; Matich, G. SpikeSEG: Spiking Segmentation via STDP Saliency Mapping. In
Proceedings of the 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Glasgow, UK, 19–24 July 2020; pp. 1–8.
[CrossRef]
106. Godet, P.; Boulch, A.; Plyer, A.; Le Besnerais, G. STaRFlow: A SpatioTemporal Recurrent Cell for Lightweight Multi-Frame
Optical Flow Estimation. In Proceedings of the 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Milan, Italy,
10–15 January 2021; pp. 2462–2469.
107. Cuevas-Arteaga, B.; Dominguez-Morales, J.P.; Rostro-Gonzalez, H.; Espinal, A.; Jiménez-Fernandez, A.; Gómez-Rodríguez, F.;
Linares-Barranco, A. A SpiNNaker Application: Design, Implementation and Validation of SCPGs. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Work-Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, IWANN 2017, Cadiz, Spain, 14-16 June 2017; Volume 10305.
108. Bing, Z.; Baumann, I.; Jiang, Z.; Huang, K.; Cai, C.; Knoll, A. Supervised Learning in SNN via Reward-Modulated Spike-TimingDependent Plasticity for a Target Reaching Vehicle. Front. Neurorobot. 2019, 13, 18. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Stimberg, M.; Brette, R.; Goodman, D.F. Brian 2, an intuitive and efficient neural simulator. eLife 2019, 8, e47314. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
110. Gewaltig, M.O.; Diesmann, M. NEST (NEural Simulation Tool). Scholarpedia 2007, 2, 1430. [CrossRef]

Brain Sci. 2022, 12, 863

30 of 30

111. Bekolay, T.; Bergstra, J.; Hunsberger, E.; DeWolf, T.; Stewart, T.; Rasmussen, D.; Choo, X.; Voelker, A.; Eliasmith, C. Nengo: A
Python tool for building large-scale functional brain models. Front. Neuroinform. 2014, 7, 1–13. [CrossRef]
112. Keras. Available online: https://github.com/keras-team/keras (accessed on 5 September 2021).
113. Mozafari, M.; Ganjtabesh, M.; Nowzari-Dalini, A.; Masquelier, T. SpykeTorch: Efficient Simulation of Convolutional Spiking
Neural Networks With at Most One Spike per Neuron. Front. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 625. [CrossRef]
114. Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.; Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.; Lin, Z.; Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L.; et al. PyTorch:
An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32; Wallach,
H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d’Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R., Eds.; Curran Associates, Inc.: Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019;
pp. 8024–8035.
115. Hazan, H.; Saunders, D.J.; Khan, H.; Sanghavi, D.T.; Siegelmann, H.T.; Kozma, R. BindsNET: A machine learning-oriented
spiking neural networks library in Python. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1806.01423.
116. Shrestha, S.B.; Orchard, G. SLAYER: Spike Layer Error Reassignment in Time. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
31; Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Garnett, R., Eds.; Curran Associates, Inc.: Red Hook,
NY, USA, 2018; pp. 1419–1428.
117. Yavuz, E.; Turner, J.; Nowotny, T. GeNN: A code generation framework for accelerated brain simulations. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 18854.
[CrossRef]
118. Chou, T.S.; Kashyap, H.J.; Xing, J.; Listopad, S.; Rounds, E.L.; Beyeler, M.; Dutt, N.; Krichmar, J.L. CARLsim 4: An Open Source
Library for Large Scale, Biologically Detailed Spiking Neural Network Simulation using Heterogeneous Clusters. In Proceedings
of the 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 8–13 July 2018; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
119. Balaji, A.; Adiraju, P.; Kashyap, H.J.; Das, A.; Krichmar, J.L.; Dutt, N.D.; Catthoor, F. PyCARL: A PyNN Interface for HardwareSoftware Co-Simulation of Spiking Neural Network. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2003.09696.
120. Zenke, F.; Gerstner, W. Limits to high-speed simulations of spiking neural networks using general-purpose computers. Front.
Neuroinform. 2014, 8, 76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Kasabov, N.K. NeuCube: A spiking neural network architecture for mapping, learning and understanding of spatio-temporal
brain data. Neural Netw. 2014, 52, 62–76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Susi, G.; Garcés, P.; Paracone, E.; Cristini, A.; Salerno, M.; Maestú, F.; Pereda, E. FNS allows efficient event-driven spiking neural
network simulations based on a neuron model supporting spike latency. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 12160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

