1440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023

A Spiking Neural Network With Adaptive Graph
Convolution and LSTM for EEG-Based
Brain-Computer Interfaces
Peiliang Gong , Pengpai Wang , Yueying Zhou , and Daoqiang Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Electroencephalography (EEG) signals classification is essential for the brain-computer interface (BCI).
Recently, energy-efficient spiking neural networks (SNNs)
have shown great potential in EEG analysis due to their
ability to capture the complex dynamic properties of biological neurons while also processing stimulus information
through precisely timed spike trains. However, most existing methods do not effectively mine the specific spatial
topology of EEG channels and temporal dependencies of
the encoded EEG spikes. Moreover, most are designed
for specific BCI tasks and lack some generality. Hence,
this study presents a novel SNN model with the customized spike-based adaptive graph convolution and long
short-term memory (LSTM), termed SGLNet, for EEG-based
BCIs. Specifically, we first adopt a learnable spike encoder
to convert the raw EEG signals into spike trains. Then,
we tailor the concepts of the multi-head adaptive graph
convolution to SNN so that it can make good use of
the intrinsic spatial topology information among distinct
EEG channels. Finally, we design the spike-based LSTM
units to further capture the temporal dependencies of the
spikes. We evaluate our proposed model on two publicly
available datasets from two representative fields of BCI,
notably emotion recognition, and motor imagery decoding.
The empirical evaluations demonstrate that SGLNet consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art EEG classification algorithms. This work provides a new perspective for
exploring high-performance SNNs for future BCIs with rich
spatiotemporal dynamics.
Index Terms— EEG classification, brain-computer interface, spiking neural network, graph convolution, LSTM.

I. I NTRODUCTION
RAIN-COMPUTER Interface (BCI) is a direct connecting pathway between the brain and an external device,
allowing for bidirectional information exchange between them.

B

Manuscript received 16 September 2022; revised 14 January 2023;
accepted 13 February 2023. Date of publication 22 February 2023;
date of current version 28 February 2023. This work was supported
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 62136004, Grant 61876082, and Grant 61732006; in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant 2018YFC2001600 and Grant 2018YFC2001602; and in part by
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant NP2022451. (Corresponding author: Daoqiang Zhang.)
The authors are with the MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, College of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106,
China (e-mail: plgong@nuaa.edu.cn; pengpaiwang@nuaa.edu.cn;
zhouyueying@nuaa.edu.cn; dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3246989

Typically, BCI involves fields of information science, cognitive
science, materials science, and life science, which are having
an increasingly critical impact on artificial intelligence, bioengineering, and neurorehabilitation [1], [2]. There are multiple ways to implement BCI technology, such as Electroencephalogram (EEG), functional near-infrared spectroscopy,
etc. Nevertheless, EEG is the commonly used technique for
capturing brain function in BCI systems due to its advantages
of safety, ease of operation, and low cost, as well as its ability
to track and record signals from the brain in a non-invasive
manner. Furthermore, realizing the automatic decoding of the
collected EEG signals is a vital step toward making EEG
more practical in BCI applications and reducing reliance on
professionals.
In recent years, EEG-based BCIs have been used in a
wide range of application areas [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8],
[9], [10], [11]. For instance, BCI can facilitate the identification of the user’s emotional state (e.g., sadness, gladness, etc.) by analyzing the evoked neural patterns when
the user is immersed in different types of emotional content [5], [6]. Moreover, BCI can also provide a new form
of control for people with movement disorders by imagining
specific movements (e.g., left hand, right hand) [7], [8].
Accordingly, several effective methods have emerged for BCI
through mining and extracting task-relevant features from
EEG signals. In the early stages, some classical machine
learning and pattern recognition algorithms were commonly
applied in BCI to explore critical features concerning distinct
tasks. For instance, the independent component analysis (ICA)
approach was used to remove artifacts, and principal component analysis (PCA) methods were used to reduce feature
dimensionality [12]. Common spatial paternal (CSP) [13]
and filter bank common spatial pattern (FBCSP) [14] were
extensively utilized for feature extraction. In addition, classic
supervised learning algorithms such as linear discriminant
analysis (LDA), support vector machines (SVM), and decision trees were widely used to investigate linear or nonlinear relationships encountered in EEG-based BCIs [15].
Although various machine learning methods have been proposed and implemented, most of them were heavily reliant on
hand-crafted features.
With the explosive growth of data and significant improvements in computing power, deep learning technology has

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

GONG et al.: SNN WITH ADAPTIVE GRAPH CONVOLUTION AND LSTM FOR EEG-BASED BCIs

advanced rapidly and achieved remarkable results in computer
vision [16] and natural language processing [17]. It has also
greatly promoted the application of deep learning in the field
of EEG-based BCIs [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. For example,
Schirrmeister et al. [18] investigated deep and shallow convolutional neural networks, named DeepConvNet and ShallowConvNet, to decode motor imagery and executive tasks from
raw EEG signals. Lawhern et al. [19] proposed an end-to-end
deep learning framework named EEGNet that uses three convolutional layers to extract temporal and spatial patterns from
EEG data. To address the problems of limited training data
and single convolution scale, researchers have also proposed
some distinct models for mining characteristics of different
dimensions or scales to boost the accuracy of EEG-based
BCIs [21], [22]. After that, many researchers used long
short-term memory (LSTM) to implement EEG-based BCI
tasks to better capture time-dependent information [6], [23],
[24], [25], [26], [27], [28]. For example, Alhagry et al. [23]
presented an LSTM network to investigate the time-varying
properties of EEG signals in emotion recognition. Li et al. [24]
proposed an EEG-based motor imagery algorithm based on
convolution neural network (CNN) and LSTM network fusion
of multi-level spatiotemporal features. Additionally, to exploit
the topological relationship between electrodes, researchers
have tried to use graph convolutional networks for EEG-based
BCIs [5], [29], [30], [31]. For instance, Song et al. [29]
proposed a dynamic graph convolutional neural network with
a trainable adjacency matrix for EEG-based emotion recognition. Zhong et al. [30] introduced a regularized graph neural
network for EEG-based emotion recognition that considers
the biological topology between distinct brain regions to better
capture the local and global interactions between different
EEG channels.
Although the deep neural network frameworks mentioned
above have demonstrated good classification performance,
their high power, and memory consumption can be bottlenecks
for EEG-based BCI applications on portable devices [32].
Whereas, spiking neural networks (SNNs) leverage more biologically realistic neuron models, bridging the gap between
neuroscience and learning algorithms. Currently, SNNs have
been demonstrated to be more computationally efficient than
artificial neural networks (ANNs), both in theory and in several
practical applications [33], [34], [35].
Since SNNs encode and process stimulus information
through precisely timed spike trains, they are considered a
crucial approach to brain signal processing. Recent studies
using SNNs to analyze EEG signals have grown in popularity [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43]. For
example, Kasabov [36] proposed the NeuCube architecture
to build an evolving SNN to realize spatial-temporal pattern recognition, which combines structural and functional
aspects of the brain and leverages unsupervised spike-timingdependent plasticity (STDP) and supervised learning algorithms. Subsequently, the NeuCube framework-based methods
were proposed for EEG-based motor imagery decoding [37],
emotion recognition [39], [40], etc. However, such methods are
usually computationally expensive when training 3D cubes,
especially when the data size is large. Moreover, because

1441

this kind of method is more suitable for shallow network
structures, the accuracy rate is relatively low. More recently,
Yan et al. [41] have attempted to accomplish EEG-based
emotion recognition by converting the trained ANN into an
SNN. The traditional backpropagation method is used to train
a CNN first. The weights in CNN are then transferred to
the equivalent SNN. Despite such a method achieving relatively good classification accuracy, indirect training is of little
help in revealing how SNNs learn, since it only implements
the inference stage in SNN format (training in ANN format). It imposes also numerous constraints on the pre-trained
ANN model, such as only using average pooling.
In summary, most existing EEG-related work proposes
pipelines tailored for specific classification or regression
tasks. As a result, there is a distinct lack of a general EEG representation learning framework that performs
robustly for different BCI tasks such as emotion recognition and motor imagery decoding. Moreover, it is noteworthy that most SNN-based techniques do not effectively
mine the specific topological information from EEG channels and adequately capture the temporal dependencies of
encoded EEG spikes. Therefore, there is an urgent need for
a novel SNN that is more versatile for EEG-based BCIs,
with the promise of expansion to portable devices with real
applications.
To address these challenges, in this paper, we introduce a spiking multi-head adaptive graph convolution and
LSTM neural network, termed SGLNet, for EEG-based
BCIs. Our contributions are mainly summarized as follows:
1) To our knowledge, the proposed SGLNet is the first
attempt to simultaneously embed graph convolution and
LSTM into an SNN and adopts a direct training strategy to
complete EEG-based BCI tasks effectively.
2) The proposed SNN employs the spike-based multi-head
adaptive graph convolution module and LSTM units to capture
spatial topological relations and temporal dependencies. Furthermore, the direct learnable spike coding mechanism enables
a more task-oriented conversion of EEG signals into spike
trains according to specific downstream BCI tasks.
3) Extensive experiments are conducted on two representative EEG-based BCI tasks, namely emotion recognition
and motor imagery decoding, to verify the generality and
effectiveness of the proposed model. The results demonstrate
that the resulting SNN model exhibits better superiority in
different tasks.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce the core blocks and present the SGLNet model.
The classification performance of the proposed model is
evaluated in Section III. Conclusions and potential future work
are addressed in Section IV.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we introduce the details of our proposed
method. The architecture of the SGLNet is illustrated in Fig. 1.
We summarize three key ideas of the SGLNet as follows: 1)
Encode raw EEG signals to spike trains using a learnable linear
transformation and an iterative Leak Integrate-and-Fire neu-

1442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023

Fig. 1. The overall architecture of the SGLNet model for EEG classification. Firstly, the model takes the EEG signal and electrode positions as
input. The input EEG signals are converted into spike trains by the spike encoder (a. Spike encoding), while the electrode positions are utilized
to construct the k -NN graph (b. Graph construction). Then the spike trains and k -NN graph are input to the spike-based MHAGC module to mine
the spatial topology information, and the subsequent spike-based LSTM unit is used to capture the temporal dependencies of spikes (c. Feature
extraction). Ultimately, the spike-based fully connected and voting layers are used to accomplish signal classification (d. Classification).

rons precisely. 2) Construct the adjacency matrix heuristically
to represent the pairwise relations between EEG electrodes,
and then extend the multi-head adaptive graph convolution
module into the SNN to enable the mining of spatial topology
efficiently. 3) Incorporate the tailored spike-based LSTM units
to further exploit temporal dependence information of spikes.
The overall architecture is elaborately designed to identify
EEG signals accurately and efficiently.
A. Leak Integrate-and-Fire Neuron Model
First, we describe the biological neuron model used in this
paper. According to neuroscience, we know biological neurons
interact by generating and propagating electrical impulses
called action potentials or spikes. This characteristic of real
neurons becomes the foundation for theorizing spike neural
models. Currently, there are various neuron models with varying complexity, such as the Hodgkin Huxley (HH) [44], the
Leak Integrate-and-Fire neuron (LIF) [45] and the Izhikevich
model (IZ) [46]. Due to its high biological similarity and
computational simplicity, the LIF neuron model was chosen
as the basis for building each neuron node in our SNN.
The LIF neuron model includes leakage integration and
reset of membrane potential, which is described as Eq. (1),
 dU
τt dtmem = −Umem + It , Umem < Vth
(1)
f ir e a spike & Umem ← Ur eset , Umem ≥ Vth
where τt is a time constant for membrane potential decay.
Umem is post-neuronal membrane potential. It stands for presynaptic inputs. Vth is a predetermined fire threshold, and
Ur eset is the reset value of membrane potential. The overall
process of the LIF neuron model is depicted in Fig. 2. Afferent
pre-spikes accumulate continuously, and the post-neuron fires
the post-spike and resets the membrane potential once the
membrane potential exceeds the firing threshold.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the update of membrane potential and spike firing.

Since the raw differential expression of the LIF neuron
model is applicable to biological simulations in the continuous domain, we convert it to a numerical iterative form
with the help of Euler’s method. Specifically, it can be
shown as Eq. (2),
(t+1)
Umem
=



dt
1−
τt



(t)
Umem
+

dt
It
τt

(2)

We further simplify the element (1 − dt
τt ) as decay factor
kdecay , and incorporate the factor dt
into
learnable
parameters
τt
of the input It . Hence, the Eq. (2) can be rewritten as Eq. (3),
(t+1)
(t)
Umem
= kdecay Umem
+ It ( p)

here, p is used to represent the learnable parameters.

(3)

GONG et al.: SNN WITH ADAPTIVE GRAPH CONVOLUTION AND LSTM FOR EEG-BASED BCIs

Then, we combine the updating-firing-resetting mechanism
as Eq. (4),



(t+1)
(t)
(t)
 Umem
= kdecay Umem 1 − Sspike + It+1 ( p)


(4)
(t+1)
 S (t+1) = Step F Umem
− Vth
spike
(t)

(t+1)

where Sspike and Sspike denote the output spikes at the
time steps t and t + 1, respectively. Step F (·) represents the
Heaviside step function, which satisfies Step F (x) = 1 when
x ≥ 0, otherwise Step F (x) = 0. It+1 ( p) represents input
function, which transforms and processes the input spikes at
time step t + 1. In this paper, we adopt distinct input functions
It+1 ( p) in different modules to accomplish specific processing
and utilization of the spike signals.
B. Spike Encoder
The raw EEG signals consist of continuous float-point real
values, but SNNs accept discrete spike trains. A proper spike
encoder is essential to take raw EEG signals as input and
output spikes for the subsequent procedures. Currently, various
coding schemes have been proposed to convert real values into
spike trains. For instance, temporal coding generates one spike
per neuron in which spike latency is inversely proportional
to the pixel intensity. The rate coding scheme encodes the
input by generating a spike train over T timesteps, where
the total number of spikes is proportional to the magnitude
of input values. Although these methods have gained some
success, they are not capable of being optimized for specific
downstream tasks. Thus, we adopt a more precise learnable
coding scheme to accomplish the conversion from real-valued
EEG signals to spike trains.
Specifically, in the spike encoder module, a linear transformation operator is adopted in conjunction with the LIF neuron
model. The encoding strategy of the raw EEG signal at the t-th
time step can be stated as Eq. (5),



(t)
(t−1)
(t−1)
(t)
 X mem
= kdecay X mem 1 − X spike + X input · W Encoder


(5)
(t)
 X (t) = Step F X mem
− Vth
spike
where W Encoder represents the learnable encoder matrix.
(t)
(t)
(t−1)
X spike , X input and X mem denote the spike train encoded at
time step t − 1, the input EEG signal at time step t, and the
accumulated membrane potential at time step t, respectively,
(0)
(0)
and X mem = X spike = 0. Vth is a given encoder threshold.
C. Spike-Based Multi-Head Adaptive Graph Convolution
Module
1) Graph Construction: In general, the graph definition
enhances the brain area representation ability of EEG signals,
while reducing the impact of noise on each node of EEG
signals. In this work, let G (V, E) be an undirected graph,
where V is a set of N nodes, and E is the corresponding
edges. The nodes are naturally mapped into electrodes, but
the node connections have to be specified. Studies [47] have
investigated that adjacent brain regions influence each other,
and the strength is inversely proportional to actual physical
distance. Therefore, we construct a spatial distance-based node

1443

connection by utilizing the 3D electrode coordinates. The
k-nearest neighbor algorithm (k-NN) is chosen due to its
simplicity and effectiveness. Here, we adopt the Euclidean
distance to obtain the k closest neighbors of each node.
2) Graph Convolution Module: The graph convolutional neural network can better mine topological structure information,
hence it is well suited to these data with non-Euclidean
structure. Coincidentally, EEG signals can be naturally viewed
as graph-structured data, where each electrode corresponds to
a node, and geographic distance relationships or functional
connections act as edges. Thus, it is necessary to combine
graph convolution and SNN for efficient utilization of topological relations. To implement the spike-based graph convolution
module, we first build a conventional form of multi-head
adaptive graph convolution operator [48] and then incorporate
it into the LIF neuron model described in this paper.
Specifically, the multi-head adaptive graph convolution
operator is defined as Eq. (6),
H

Z= ∥
h=1

B
X

!

1
1
eD
e− 2 )X Wb )
e− 2 A
ωbh ⊙ (( D

(6)

b=1

where ⊙ and ∥ denote the Hadamard product and the cone = A + I N is the adjacency
catenation operator, respectively. A
e is the diagonal degree
matrix with added self-loops
and
D
PN
eii =
e
matrix with D
A
.
X
∈ R N ×Fin is the input
j=1 i j
Fout

features matrix of nodes and Wb ∈ R Fin × H is the b-th
learnable basis transformation matrix. ω = X 8 is the weight
coefficient matrix, and its element ωbh ∈ R N corresponding to
the b-th basis transformation matrix and the h-th head, where
8 ∈ R Fin ×B H is weight parameters associated with calculating
the combination weighting coefficients.
In Fig. 3(a), we visualize the processing of a node by
1
the multi-head adaptive graph convolution module. Step ⃝
illustrates the feature propagation and aggregation stage. First,
b different linear transformation matrices are used to extract
the features of different nodes, and then the features of the
neighbor nodes are aggregated according to the neighborhood
relationship to obtain the representation of the target node.
2 shows the multi-head adaptive weighting process for
Step ⃝
mixed node representation. First, the transformation matrix is
applied to the target node to obtain different combined weighting coefficients. The node representations are then summed
according to the combined weight coefficients. Finally, the
node features from differently weighted summations are concatenated to obtain the output representation of the target node.
3) Spike-Based Graph Convolution Module: Next, we integrate the aforementioned graph convolution module into the
framework of our SNN. With the help of the LIF neuron
model, we modify the input part as a multi-head adaptive
graph convolution module to obtain the spike-based graph
convolution operator. Fig. 3(b) displays the process of the
module. Mathematically, we express it as Eq. (7), shown at
the bottom of the next page, where Z (t) and Z (t+1) denote
the spike trains at the t-th time step and (t+1)-th time
(t)
step, respectively. Umem represents post-neuronal aggregated
representations.

1444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023

Fig. 4. Illustration of the proposed spike-based LSTM unit.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the spike-based adaptive graph convolution module. (a) Illustration of a multi-head adaptive graph convolution module.
In this diagram, there are three heads and three bases for obtaining the
node representations. (b) Illustration of the spike-based graph convolution module. GC in the figure represents the graph convolution module.
The node representations obtained by the graph convolution module at
the current time step and the spike trains obtained at the previous time
step are passed into the LIF neuron model to output the spikes of each
node.

D. Spike-Based LSTM Unit
RNNs and their variants are a special class of neural networks that have shown remarkable effects due to their ability to
capture the temporal dependencies of their inputs in different
sequential processing tasks. As an excellent variant of RNNs,
LSTM not only inherits the characteristics of most RNN models but also solves the problem of vanishing gradients caused
by the gradual reduction in the gradient backpropagation
process. Therefore, to further mine the temporal dependencies
of spikes, we design customized spike-based LSTM units as
part of our proposed model.
Similar to the conventional LSTM unit, the overall data
flow of the devised spike-based LSTM unit is outlined in
Fig. 4. From this figure, X ts , Hts , and Cts represent the input
spike state, the hidden spike state, and the cell spike state,
respectively. Er f (·) and Step F (·) are used to denote different
activation functions, where the former is the Gauss error
function and the latter represents the Heaviside step function.
It is easy to find that the core difference from the conventional
LSTM unit is that the overall data flow is in the form of

spikes, as the use of the Heaviside step function to complete
the conversion of real values to spikes. Next, we introduce the
data flow processing within the proposed spike-based LSTM
units. Like conventional LSTM units, there are mainly three
different spike states, namely the input spike state, the hidden
spike state, and the cell spike state, three different gates to
control the flow of information, namely the forget gate, the
input gate, and the output gate, and two different types of
memory to maintain time dependencies, namely long memory
and short memory. Concretely, the aforementioned elements
such as data states and gates can be characterized as follows,


s
f ts = Er f W xf · X ts + W hf · Ht−1
+ b xf + bhf
(8)


s
i ts = Er f Wix · X ts + Wih · Ht−1
+ bix + bih
(9)


ets = Step F Wcx · X ts + Wch · H s + bcx + bch
C
(10)
t−1


s
ots = Step F Wox · X ts + Woh · Ht−1
+ box + boh
(11)

s
s
s
s
s
et + f t ⊙ C
(12)
Ct = Step F i t ⊙ C
t−1
Hts = ots ⊙ Cts

(13)

where f ts , i ts and ots represent the forget gate, the input gate
and the output gate, respectively. The calculation processes of
Cts and Hts imply the long-term memory and the short-term
memory, respectively. The operator ⊙ denotes the Hadamard
product. It is worth noting that in the calculation process of
long-term memory Cts , the range of the sum of the information of the previous LSTM unit and the information of
the current LSTM unit may be greater than 1, so here we
utilize the step function to process the resulting calculated
result. In addition, to better control the flow of information,
the activation functions of the forget gate and the input gate


 B

H

P h (t+1)
1
1

(t+1)
(t)
(t+1)
−
−
(t)
(t+1)
 Umem
e
e
e
2
2
= kdecay Umem 1 − Z
+ ∥
ωb
⊙ (( D A D )Z
Wb
)

 h=1 b=1

 Z (t+1) = Step F U (t+1) − V
th
mem

(7)

GONG et al.: SNN WITH ADAPTIVE GRAPH CONVOLUTION AND LSTM FOR EEG-BASED BCIs

1445

Gaussian error function to approximate the derivative of spike
activity. Formally, they can be expressed as Eq. (15) and Eq.
(16),
α
Atan ′ (x) =
(15)
π
2(1 + ( 2 α(x − Vth ))2 )
α
2
2
Er f ′ (x) = √ · e−α (x−Vth )
(16)
π

Fig. 5. Illustration of the Heaviside step function, Approximate step
function, Dirac delta function, and different surrogate gradient functions.

use the primitive function ofR Gauss error function, which is
2
αx
expressed as Er f (x) = √1π −∞ e−t dt.
E. Spike-Based FC Module and Voting Layer
Similar to the conventional fully connected layer, the
spike-based FC module first linearly transforms the incoming
(t)
(t)
spike trains from the previous layer, i.e., X hidden = X spike ·
(t)

W f c . Then, the transformed result X hidden is superimposed
with the attenuated spike signal of the previous time step.
Finally, the output spike train is obtained by comparing with
the given threshold.
The voting layer is utilized to decode the final output.
Specifically, each output class label is first associated with
a neuron in the voting layer. The predicted class label is the
one associated with the neuron that received the most votes
(corresponding to the spike, i.e., number 1) in the sum of the
output spike trains over all time steps.
F. Model Training
We define the loss function to measure the difference
between the ground-truth and the voting result over all time
steps. The loss function is shown as Eq. (14),
T

1 X (t)
Loss = Y −
Ospike
T
t=1

2

(14)
2

where T represents the total time steps. Y denotes the given
(t)
true label, and Ospike is the output spike train from the last
layer at the t-th time step.
As we know, a core issue in training SNN is that the binary
spike activities are non-differentiable during backpropagation.
This is due to the derivative of the Heaviside step function
is the Dirac delta function, which seriously challenges the
effectiveness of SNN learning. As shown in Fig. 5, the Dirac
delta function has zero value everywhere except an infinity
value at zero, which can lead to failures due to the gradient
vanishing or exploding issue when the error propagation.
To resolve this problem, the concept of surrogate gradients
was first introduced [49]. we introduce the gradient functions
Atan ′ (·) of the Arc tangent function and Er f ′ (·) of the

where the parameter α determines the shape of the surrogate
function. These surrogate functions are shown in Fig. 5, and it
can be seen that the Dirac delta function can be well approximated. In this work, Er f ′ (·) is utilized in the spike-based
LSTM units, and Atan ′ (·) is used in all other modules.
Notably, the spike signals in SNNs not only propagate in the
spatial layer but also affect the neuron states in the temporal
domain, thus, the spatial-temporal backpropagation training
algorithm [50] is adopted to train our proposed model.
III. E XPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Settings
1) Datasets: DEAP [51] dataset is a multimodal dataset for
the analysis of human affective states. The evoked EEG, electromyogram (EMG), and other peripheral bioelectric signals of
32 participants were detected and recorded as each watched
40 one-minute music videos. Before each trial, there was a 3s
baseline recording period. After watching the videos, an online
self-assessment tool with a 1-9 score scale was designed to
collect subject feedback on arousal, valence, etc. Here, we use
only EEG signals in the dataset. It has 32 channels and the
sampling rate is resampled from 512Hz to 128Hz. We choose
arousal and valence as emotion assessment criteria and apply
a threshold value of 5 to classify high or low arousal/valence.
A non-overlapping time window of 4s is used to divide the
EEG data so that each subject contained a total of 600 samples.
The PhysioNet [52] dataset comprises over 1500 EEG
recordings from 109 subjects. Subjects performed different
motor or imagery tasks while 64-channel EEG signals with a
160Hz sampling rate were recorded using the BCI2000 system.
The data from the motor imagery task is used in this study.
As the record of subject #89 showed that only one motor intention task was performed during each experiment, the record of
this subject was removed from further analysis. The raw EEG
data were re-referenced to the average of the electrodes and
were standardized. Each subject performed 84 trials (4 tasks
× 3 runs × 7 trials), where each trial lasted 4 seconds. Four
tasks are denoted as imagining the opening and closing of the
left fist (Left-fist), imagining the opening and closing of the
right fist (Right-fist), imagining the opening and closing of
both fists (Both-fists), and imagining the opening and closing
of both feet (Both-feet), respectively.
2) Implementation Protocol: We conduct both subject-mixed
and cross-subject classifications on different datasets to evaluate the model. For the subject-mixed experiment protocol,
we adopt a five-fold cross-validation strategy to assess the
classification performance of the model. Specifically, we first
mix samples from all subjects, then used 80% of the data for
training and the remaining 20% for testing at each fold. For

1446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023

the cross-subject experiment, we adopt a leave-one-subjectout (LOSO) cross-validation strategy to evaluate the model on
the DEAP dataset. For the PhysioNet dataset, due to a large
number of subjects (108 subjects), a leave-multiple-subjectout (LMSO) cross-validation strategy is used to assess the
classification performance of the model. That is, the dataset
was divided into k non-overlapping subsets of subjects, and
then at each fold a subset of subjects was retained as the test
set and the remaining k-1 subsets of subjects were used as
training data. Here k is set to 10. We repeated this procedure
for each subset until all EEG signals had been processed once
as test data.
3) Implementation Details: In the experiment, our model
uses only raw EEG data without any hand-crafted features.
We implement the proposed method using Pytorch on a
GeForce GTX TITAN X GPU device with 11G memory. The
stochastic gradient descent with Adam optimizer is employed
to minimize the mean square error loss function. The network
parameters are optimized with an initial learning rate of
1 × 10−3 . The model is trained for a total of 100 epochs.
In addition, the feature dimension of the spike encoder layer
is set to be the same as the raw input data dimension, and the
time step is set to 8, which means that each time step contains
0.5s of EEG signal. The number of heads and bases in the
multi-head adaptive graph convolution module is empirically
set to 8 and 4 as suggested in the paper [49], and the feature
dimension is set to 64. We empirically set the decay factor
to 0.6, and the α corresponding to AT an ′ (·) and Er f ′ (·)
to 3.0 and 2.0, respectively. The firing-spike threshold, and
k, and batch size are set to 0.3, 5, and 64 on PhysioNet
dataset and 0.5, 3, and 128 on DEAP dataset, respectively. The
feature dimension of the fully connected layer is set to 256.
In addition, for subject-mixed experiment, the hidden state size
of the spike-based LSTM units is set to 128. For cross-subject
experiment, the hidden state size of the spike-based LSTM
units is set to 256 on DEAP and 128 on PhysioNet.
B. Results Analysis and Comparison
In this section, we present model evaluation results under
subject-mixed and cross-subject experimental protocols and
provide a brief analysis of them.
1) Subject-Mixed Experimental Results: In subject-mixed
experiment, we compare SGLNet primarily with representative
baseline methods ConvNet [18], EEGNet [19], LSTM [23],
DGCNN [29], NeuCube [36], NeuroVar [39], and CatSNN
[41] for EEG classification on different datasets. We either
quote their results directly from the literature or reproduce
their results according to their published code to ensure a
convincing comparison with the proposed method. We use
the average accuracy and standard deviation as the evaluation
criteria for all datasets. The experimental results are reported
in Table I.
Table I demonstrates that the proposed SGLNet achieves
consistently better classification performance with a lower
standard deviation than other baseline methods across all tasks,
thus verifying the effectiveness of the SGLNet. In particular,
the conventional deep learning methods like EEGNet, and

TABLE I
C OMPARISONS OF THE AVERAGE ACCURACIES AND S TANDARD
D EVIATIONS (%) OF S UBJECT-M IXED E XPERIMENTS A MONG THE
VARIOUS M ETHODS . T HE B EST VALUES O N E ACH DATASET A RE
H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

DGCNN show a significant superior performance than NeuCube framework-based spiking neural networks. This may be
due to the that, compared to end-to-end deep convolutional
networks, the Neucube framework-based methods usually
include two stages: first unsupervised learning to modify the
initial connection weights, and then supervised learning was
applied to reinforce the neuron’s output classification module. It makes the spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP)
stage unable to flexibly adjust according to the subsequent
classification tasks, thus affecting the further improvement
of performance. In addition, the lack of global information
hinders the convergence of large models, especially on complex datasets. Notably, the recently proposed ANN-SNN-based
method CatSNN achieved superior classification results. This
may be attributed to the that they first trained an advanced
CNN twin utilizing the standard backpropagation method,
and converted it into a spiking version by transfer learning,
effectively capturing the temporal characteristics of spikes.
However, such an indirect training method usually needs to
run more simulation time to reach good performance.
2) Cross-Subject Experimental Results: For the crosssubject experiment, we mainly compare SGLNet with representative methods ConvNet [18], EEGNet [19], LSTM [23],
and DGCNN [29] on different datasets. We maintain the same
experimental setup to ensure a fair comparison. Similar to
the subject-mixed strategy, We use the average accuracy and
standard deviation as the evaluation criteria for all evaluation
datasets. The calculated results are exhibited in Table I.
As can be seen from Table I, the proposed SGLNet model
achieves better classification results on different datasets compared to the leading methods, further demonstrating the validity of the model. Specifically, compared to the method that
achieved the second-best results on the Arousal, Valence, and
PhysioNet tasks, the proposed SGLNet improves by at least
0.38%, 1.04%, and 2.5% respectively. Since most DL-based
EEG decoders are designed for a single type of EEG decoding
task due to the high variability between different types of
BCI tasks, experimental results show that SGLNet provides
relatively better performance across types of EEG data. Our
study demonstrates a degree of generalization capability to
accommodate general types of EEG data compared to other

GONG et al.: SNN WITH ADAPTIVE GRAPH CONVOLUTION AND LSTM FOR EEG-BASED BCIs

1447

TABLE II
C OMPARISONS OF THE AVERAGE ACCURACIES AND S TANDARD
D EVIATIONS (%) OF C ROSS -S UBJECT E XPERIMENTS A MONG THE
VARIOUS M ETHODS . T HE B EST VALUES O N E ACH DATASET A RE
H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

leading DL models, due to SGLNet can well mine the spatial
topological relationship and long-term dependency characteristics of EEG by effectively integrating the spike-based graph
convolution and LSTM modules into the SNN.
Moreover, it’s worth noting that all methods achieved lower
classification performance when compared to the results of the
subject-mixed experiments. This may be attributed to the large
variation in data distribution between subjects. However, there
is no specific design for cross-subject scenarios to mitigate performance degradation due to individual differences. We leave
further improvements to this for future research work.
C. Ablation Studies
The proposed SGLNet has several components. To verify
the effect of each module, we conduct extensive ablation
studies on all datasets under subject-mixed protocol. First,
we replace the learnable spike encoding module (Enc) with
the threshold-based spiking way (firing a spike when the membrane potential exceeds a given threshold) to verify the effect
of the spiker encoder we used on classification performance.
Then, we remove the spike-based graph convolution module
(Gra) and the spike-based LSTM units (Lstm) respectively
to verify their effects. Note that to reduce the randomness,
we conduct all the experiments five times. Fig. 6 presents that
the key components in our model are effective. Specifically,
it indicates that compared with the conventional spiking encoding scheme, the classification performance of the model can
be significantly enhanced by incorporating the spike encoding
of the EEG signal into the model training process. This is due
to the converted spikes can be effectively adjusted according
to the specific downstream classification task. In addition, the
results show that the use of the spike-based graph convolution
module and the spike-based LSTM units in the proposed
model further boosts the classification effect, which validate
the effectiveness of the different components.
D. Parameters Analysis
In this section, we conduct experiments on all datasets
under subject-mixed protocol to analyze the impact of different
parameters on the model, mainly including the firing-spike
threshold, decay factor, and k. For the threshold and the decay
factor, we consider them to range from [0.2, 0.8] and [0.1, 0.9]
with an interval of 0.1, respectively. For the k in k-NN graph,

Fig. 6. Ablation studies on different datasets. The values of accuracy are percentile. The w/o GraEnc indicates that the model does
not have the spike-based graph convolution and learnable encoding
modules. The w/o LstmEnc indicates that the model does not have the
spike-based LSTM units and learnable encoding module. The w/o Enc
indicates that the model does not have the learnable encoding module.
The w/o Gra indicates that the model does not have the spike-based
Graph convolution module. The w/o Lstm indicates that the model does
not have the spike-based LSTM units. All indicates that the entire model
proposed in this paper.

we set it in the range of [2, 6] with an interval of 1. Fig. 7
provides the accuracy of the model using various parameters.
As shown in Fig. 7(a), for the DEAP dataset, with the
increase of the threshold, the classification performance of the
model first increases, reaches a peak accuracy at 0.5, and then
decreases and tends to be stable. Whereas for the PhysioNet
dataset, the model’s accuracy reaches a maximum at 0.3 and
then tends to decrease. In short, a moderate threshold tends
to achieve a better result. Fig. 7(b) shows the influence of
different decay factors on the model. It is not difficult to find
that for different datasets, the model performance improves
with the increase of the decay factor. When it reaches 0.6, the
model achieves the best classification performance and then
shows a decreasing trend. In addition, it indicates in Fig. 7(c)
that the best accuracy is achieved when k = 3 for the DEAP
dataset, while for the PhysioNet dataset, the model achieves
the best classification result when k = 5. It is worth noting
that the proposed model appears to be robust and insensitive
to the number of edge connections in the EEG graph.
E. Visualization Analysis
To intuitively demonstrate the effectiveness of our model,
a series of visualization analyses under subject-mixed protocol
are carried out in this section.
1) Model Convergence Analysis: Fig. 8 depicts the model’s
training (testing) accuracy and loss on different datasets as
iterations progress in a representative run. It can be found
that the training accuracy and testing accuracy increase significantly at the start of the epochs, and then gradually converged.
On the contrary, the corresponding loss decreases rapidly at the
beginning of the epochs, and then gradually tends to remain
unchanged. Both the accuracy and loss of the model have
stabilized within fifty epochs, proving that the model can
converge well.
2) Feature Representation Capability Analysis: To better
demonstrate the discrimination of the feature representations

1448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023

Fig. 7. Impact of different parameters on model performance. The
values of accuracy are percentile. (a) Threshold parameter analysis.
(b) Decay parameter analysis. (c) K parameter analysis.

Fig. 9. Feature visualization by t-SNE in projected 2-D space. Different
colors correspond to different categories. (a) Raw features of PhysioNet.
(b) Hidden feature representation of PhysionNet extracted by the model.
(c) Raw features of Arousal. (d) Hidden feature representation of Arousal
extracted by the model. (e) Raw features of Valence. (f) Hidden feature
representation of Valence extracted by the model.

Fig. 8. The training and testing accuracy and loss of the model on
different datasets as iterations progress.

extracted by the proposed model, we provide a comparative
visualization of t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding
(t-SNE) - the raw features and the average of the spike train
over all time steps extracted by the last hidden layer of the
SGLNet model. T-SNE is a nonlinear dimensionality-reduction
method, aiming to sustain data structure in a low-dimensional
space [53]. In Fig. 9, we can notice that compared with the
feature distribution of the raw signal, the model extracts a
discriminative feature representation, exhibiting a discernible
clustering effect in the projected two-dimensional space. These
clusters correspond to the data with different labels, verifying the model’s representation ability for various classes.
More notably, for the PhysioNet dataset, it shows that the
Both-feet cluster exhibits a larger margin than the other three
categories, which confirms the intuition that the difference
between the motor imagery of the feet and the hands is
relatively large, so the feature representations extracted are
more discriminative. Furthermore, it indicates that imagining
both fist movements shows greater discriminability than just
imagining a left fist or right fist movement.

Fig. 10. Visualization of the membrane potentials and spikes firing of
different classes of samples in the DEAP dataset at the output layer.
(a) Output membrane potential for data labeled high arousal. (b) Output
spike trains for data labeled high arousal. (c) Output membrane potential
for data labeled low arousal. (d) Output spike trains for data labeled low
arousal.

3) Membrane Potentials and Output Spikes Analysis: To
show the spike firing of different classes of data in the output
layer of the model, we randomly select two representative
samples in the DEAP dataset for analysis. One of which is
labeled as high arousal and the other as low arousal. It suggests

GONG et al.: SNN WITH ADAPTIVE GRAPH CONVOLUTION AND LSTM FOR EEG-BASED BCIs

1449

representative EEG-based BCI task datasets to verify the effectiveness of the model. The experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of SGLNet over current leading deep learning
methods and state-of-the-art SNNs developed for EEG-based
BCIs. In a nutshell, the SGLNet reaches a satisfactory classification performance and exhibits some generality.
Further improvements to our method are possible as future
works. For instance, more diverse ways of graph construction
can be investigated to further exploit the complementary
information between different brain views. Besides, inspired
by [40], we can consider fusing multimodal information to
enrich more discriminative features. For cross-subject scenarios, personalized spike encoding can be considered to alleviate
the differences in data distribution across individuals and
further improve the classification performance of the model.
In addition, the use of a real neuromorphic processor will be
considered to accelerate the training of the model and extend
it to real brain-computer interface applications with portable
devices.
R EFERENCES
Fig. 11.
Confusion matrices of SGLNet on different datasets.
(a) Confusion matrix of PhysioNet. (b) Confusion matrix of Arousal.
(c) Confusion matrix of Valence.

in Fig. 10(a)-(b) that for the sample whose ground-truth is
high arousal, the membrane potential accumulation value in
the high arousal dimension is much larger than that in the low
arousal dimension, and the number of spikes fired is more.
As shown in Fig. 10(c)-(d), for the sample with ground-truth
label of low arousal, the situation is completely opposite. This
intuitively reveals how the SNN fires spike trains at the output
layer and completes the correct classification of the EEG data.
4) Confusion Matrices: We also present the normalized
confusion matrices for SGLNet on different datasets by its
experimental results on one of the folds, as shown in Fig. 11.
Each row and column denote the ground-truth and the predicted labels, respectively. For the PhysioNet dataset, the
accuracy of Both-feet is highest, followed by Both-fists, while
the accuracy for Left-fist and Right-fist are comparable. These
results are consistent with our conclusion of the mentioned
in the feature visualization analysis by t-SNE that there is a
significant difference between the motor imagery of the feet
and the fists. Besides, it also indicates that the accuracy of
Both-fists is also higher than the single-fist. Among the DEAP
dataset, the accuracy of the high-arousal or high-valence is
higher than the low-arousal or low-valence classes.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel SNN fusing graph convolution and
LSTM termed SGLNet is developed for EEG-based BCI tasks.
The direct learnable spike encoder in SGLNet can efficiently
convert analog signals to spike trains dependent on the specific
downstream tasks. The spike-based multi-head adaptive graph
convolution module can better take advantage of EEG spatial
topological information, while the tailored spike-based LSTM
units can further mine the temporal dependencies of spike
signals. Extensive experiments were conducted across two

[1] K. Wang, D.-H. Zhai, Y. Xiong, L. Hu, and Y. Xia, “An MVMD-CCA
recognition algorithm in SSVEP-based BCI and its application in
robot control,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 5,
pp. 2159–2167, May 2022.
[2] L. Drew, “The brain-reading devices helping paralysed people to move,
talk and touch,” Nature, vol. 604, no. 7906, pp. 416–419, Apr. 2022.
[3] X. Gu et al., “EEG-based brain–computer interfaces (BCIs): A survey
of recent studies on signal sensing technologies and computational intelligence approaches and their applications,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput.
Biol. Bioinf., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1645–1666, Sep. 2021.
[4] A. Craik, Y. He, and J. L. Contreras-Vidal, “Deep learning for electroencephalogram (EEG) classification tasks: A review,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 16, no. 3, Jun. 2019, Art. no. 031001.
[5] Y. Yin, X. Zheng, B. Hu, Y. Zhang, and X. Cui, “EEG emotion
recognition using fusion model of graph convolutional neural networks
and LSTM,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 100, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106954.
[6] Y. Li, W. Zheng, Y. Zong, Z. Cui, T. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “A bihemisphere domain adversarial neural network model for EEG emotion
recognition,” IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 494–504,
Apr. 2021.
[7] C. Liu et al., “SincNet-based hybrid neural network for motor imagery
EEG decoding,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 30,
pp. 540–549, 2022.
[8] P. Wang, M. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Xu, and D. Zhang, “Multiband
decomposition and spectral discriminative analysis for motor imagery
BCI via deep neural network,” Frontiers Comput. Sci., vol. 16, no. 5,
pp. 1–13, Oct. 2022.
[9] Y. Zhou et al., “Cross-task cognitive workload recognition based on
EEG and domain adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 30, pp. 50–60, 2022.
[10] N. Goshtasbi, R. Boostani, and S. Sanei, “SleepFCN: A fully convolutional deep learning framework for sleep stage classification using
single-channel electroencephalograms,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 30, pp. 2088–2096, 2022.
[11] E. Eldele et al., “An attention-based deep learning approach for sleep
stage classification with single-channel EEG,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 29, pp. 809–818, 2021.
[12] P. D. Velu and V. R. de Sa, “Single-trial classification of gait and point
movement preparation from human EEG,” Frontiers Neurosci., vol. 7,
p. 84, Jun. 2013.
[13] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.-R. Müller, and G. Curio,
“The non-invasive Berlin brain–computer interface: Fast acquisition of
effective performance in untrained subjects,” Neuroimage, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 539–550, Aug. 2007.
[14] K. K. Ang, Z. Y. Chin, H. Zhang, and C. Guan, “Filter bank common
spatial pattern (FBCSP) in brain–computer interface,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Joint Conf. Neural Netw., Hong Kong, Jun. 2008, pp. 2390–2397.

1450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023

[15] A. Subasi and M. I. Gursoy, “EEG signal classification using PCA, ICA,
LDA and support vector machines,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 37, no. 12,
pp. 8659–8666, Dec. 2010.
[16] P. Wang, K. Han, X.-S. Wei, L. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Contrastive
learning based hybrid networks for long-tailed image classification,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2021, pp. 943–952.
[17] D. W. Otter, J. R. Medina, and J. K. Kalita, “A survey of the
usages of deep learning for natural language processing,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 604–624,
Feb. 2020.
[18] R. T. Schirrmeister et al., “Deep learning with convolutional neural
networks for EEG decoding and visualization,” Hum. Brain Mapping,
vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 5391–5420, 2017.
[19] V. Lawhern, A. Solon, N. Waytowich, S. M. Gordon, C. Hung, and
B. J. Lance, “EEGNet: A compact convolutional neural network for
EEG-based brain–computer interfaces,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 15, no. 5,
2018, Art. no. 056013.
[20] S. Sakhavi, C. Guan, and S. Yan, “Learning temporal information for
brain–computer interface using convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 5619–5629,
Nov. 2018.
[21] Y. Yuan, G. Xun, K. Jia, and A. Zhang, “A multi-view deep learning
framework for EEG seizure detection,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.,
vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 83–94, Sep. 2019.
[22] G. Dai, J. Zhou, J. Huang, and N. Wang, “HS-CNN: A CNN with hybrid
convolution scale for EEG motor imagery classification,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 17, no. 1, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 016025.
[23] S. Alhagry, A. A. Fahmy, and R. A. El-Khoribi, “Emotion recognition
based on EEG using LSTM recurrent neural network,” Int. J. Adv.
Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 355–358, 2017.
[24] H. Li, M. Ding, R. Zhang, and C. Xiu, “Motor imagery EEG classification algorithm based on CNN-LSTM feature fusion network,” Biomed.
Signal Process. Control, vol. 72, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 103342.
[25] L. Xia et al., “MuLHiTA: A novel multiclass classification framework
with multibranch LSTM and hierarchical temporal attention for early
detection of mental stress,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early
access, Apr. 6, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3159573.
[26] P. Wang, A. Jiang, X. Liu, J. Shang, and L. Zhang, “LSTM-based EEG
classification in motor imagery tasks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2086–2095, Nov. 2018.
[27] T. Zhang, W. Zheng, Z. Cui, Y. Zong, and Y. Li, “Spatial–temporal
recurrent neural network for emotion recognition,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 839–847, Mar. 2018.
[28] D. Zhang, L. Yao, K. Chen, S. Wang, X. Chang, and Y. Liu, “Making sense of spatio-temporal preserving representations for EEG-based
human intention recognition,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 7,
pp. 3033–3044, Jul. 2020.
[29] T. Song, W. Zheng, P. Song, and Z. Cui, “EEG emotion recognition using
dynamical graph convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Affect.
Comput., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 532–541, Jul./Sep. 2020.
[30] P. Zhong, D. Wang, and C. Miao, “EEG-based emotion recognition using regularized graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Affect. Comput., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1290–1301, Jul. 2022, doi:
10.1109/TAFFC.2020.2994159.
[31] X.-H. Wang, T. Zhang, X.-M. Xu, L. Chen, X.-F. Xing, and
C. L. P. Chen, “EEG emotion recognition using dynamical graph convolutional neural networks and broad learning system,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Bioinf. Biomed. (BIBM), Madrid, Spain, Dec. 2018,
pp. 1240–1244.
[32] D. Li, X. Chen, M. Becchi, and Z. Zong, “Evaluating the energy
efficiency of deep convolutional neural networks on CPUs and GPUs,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data Cloud Comput. (BDCloud), Social
Comput. Netw. (SocialCom), Sustain. Comput. Commun. (SustainCom)
(BDCloud-SocialCom-SustainCom), Atlanta, GA, USA, Oct. 2016,
pp. 477–484.

[33] W. Maass, “Networks of spiking neurons: The third generation of neural
network models,” Neural Netw., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1659–1671, 1997.
[34] Y. Wu, L. Deng, G. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Xie, and L. Shi, “Direct
training for spiking neural networks: Faster, larger, better,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Honolulu, HI, USA, Jul. 2019, vol. 33,
no. 1, pp. 1311–1318.
[35] Q. Yu, C. Ma, S. Song, G. Zhang, J. Dang, and K. C. Tan, “Constructing accurate and efficient deep spiking neural networks with doublethreshold and augmented schemes,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1714–1726, Apr. 2022.
[36] N. K. Kasabov, “NeuCube: A spiking neural network architecture for
mapping, learning and understanding of spatio-temporal brain data,”
Neural Netw., vol. 52, pp. 62–76, Apr. 2014.
[37] J. Behrenbeck et al., “Classification and regression of spatio-temporal
signals using NeuCube and its realization on SpiNNaker neuromorphic
hardware,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 16, no. 2, 2019, Art. no. 026014.
[38] E. Capecci, N. Kasabov, and G. Y. Wang, “Analysis of connectivity in
NeuCube spiking neural network models trained on EEG data for the
understanding of functional changes in the brain: A case study on opiate
dependence treatment,” Neural Netw., vol. 68, pp. 62–77, Aug. 2015.
[39] Y. Luo et al., “EEG-based emotion classification using spiking neural
networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 46007–46016, 2020.
[40] C. Tan, M. Šarlija, and N. Kasabov, “NeuroSense: Short-term emotion recognition and understanding based on spiking neural network
modelling of spatio-temporal EEG patterns,” Neurocomputing, vol. 434,
pp. 137–148, Apr. 2021.
[41] Z. Yan, J. Zhou, and W.-F. Wong, “EEG classification with spiking
neural network: Smaller, better, more energy efficient,” Smart Health,
vol. 24, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 100261.
[42] Y. He, C. Li, and X. Ju, “Emotion classification using EEG data in a
brain-inspired spiking neural network,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Intell.
Control Inf. Process. (ICICIP), Dali, China, Dec. 2021, pp. 433–437.
[43] C. D. Virgilio, J. H. Sossa, J. M. Antelis, and L. E. Falcón, “Spiking
neural networks applied to the classification of motor tasks in EEG
signals,” Neural Netw., vol. 122, pp. 130–143, Feb. 2020.
[44] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, “A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve,”
J. Physiol., vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 500–544, Aug. 1952.
[45] L. Lapicque, “Recherches quantitatives sur l’excitation electrique des
nerfs traitee comme une polarization,” J. Physiologie Pathologie Gen.,
vol. 9, pp. 620–635, Jan. 1907.
[46] E. M. Izhikevich, “Simple model of spiking neurons,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1569–1572, Nov. 2003.
[47] R. Salvador, J. Suckling, M. R. Coleman, J. D. Pickard, D. Menon, and
E. D. Bullmore, “Neurophysiological architecture of functional magnetic resonance images of human brain,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 15, no. 9,
pp. 1332–1342, Jan. 2005.
[48] S. A. Tailor, F. Opolka, P. Lio, and N. D. Lane, “Do we need anisotropic
graph neural networks?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
2022, pp. 1–15.
[49] E. O. Neftci, H. Mostafa, and F. Zenke, “Surrogate gradient learning
in spiking neural networks: Bringing the power of gradient-based
optimization to spiking neural networks,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag.,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 51–63, Nov. 2019.
[50] Y. Wu, L. Deng, G. Li, J. Zhu, and L. Shi, “Spatio-temporal backpropagation for training high-performance spiking neural networks,” Frontiers
Neurosci., vol. 12, p. 331, May 2018.
[51] S. Koelstra et al., “DEAP: A database for emotion analysis; using
physiological signals,” IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput., vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 18–31, Mar. 2012.
[52] G. Schalk, D. J. McFarland, T. Hinterberger, N. Birbaumer, and
J. R. Wolpaw, “BCI2000: A general-purpose brain-computer interface (BCI) system,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, no. 6,
pp. 1034–1043, Jun. 2004.
[53] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.

