Contemporary implementations of spiking bio-inspired neural networks
Andrey E. Schegolev∗
Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119991 Moscow, Russia

Marina V. Bastrakova and Michael A. Sergeev
Faculty of Physics, Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia

Anastasia A. Maksimovskaya and Nikolay V. Klenov
Faculty of Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119991 Moscow, Russia and
Dukhov All-Russia Research Institute of Automatics, Moscow 101000, Russia

arXiv:2412.17926v1 [cs.NE] 23 Dec 2024

Igor I. Soloviev
Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 119991 Moscow, Russia and
Dukhov All-Russia Research Institute of Automatics, Moscow 101000, Russia
(Dated: December 25, 2024)
The extensive development of the field of spiking neural networks has led to many areas of research that have a direct impact on people’s lives. As the most bio-similar of all neural networks,
spiking neural networks not only allow the solution of recognition and clustering problems (including dynamics), but also contribute to the growing knowledge of the human nervous system. Our
analysis has shown that the hardware implementation is of great importance, since the specifics of
the physical processes in the network cells affect their ability to simulate the neural activity of living
neural tissue, the efficiency of certain stages of information processing, storage and transmission.
This survey reviews existing hardware neuromorphic implementations of bio-inspired spiking networks in the "semiconductor", "superconductor" and "optical" domains. Special attention is given
to the possibility of effective "hybrids" of different approaches
I.

INTRODUCTION

The last decade has demonstrated a significant increase
in interdisciplinary research in neuroscience and neurobiology (this was reflected even in the decisions of the Nobel
Committee in 2024 [1, 2]). The convergence of mathematics, physics, biology, neuroscience and computer science has led to the hardware realisation of numerous
models that mimic the behaviour of living nervous tissue and reproduce characteristic neural patterns. Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have played a crucial role
in these fields of knowledge. In these networks, neurons
exchange short (about 1...2 ms for bio-systems) pulses
of the same amplitude (about 100 mV for bio-systems)
[3, 4]. SNNs come closest to mimick the activity of living nervous tissue (capable of solving surprisingly complex tasks with limiting resources) and have the greatest
biosimilarity and bioinspirability.
Spiking neural networks use a completely distinct
method of information transfer between neurons: they
encode input data as a series of discrete time spikes that
resemble the action potential of biological neurons. In
fact, the fundamental idea of SNNs is to achieve the
closest possible bio-similarity and use it to solve specific
tasks. These problems can be roughly divided into two
groups: the first group is focused on solving traditional
neural network challenges, with more emphasis on dynamic information recognition (speech, video), while the
∗ a.e.schegolev@pn.sinp.msu.ru.

second group is aimed at imitating the nervous activity
of living beings, reproducing characteristic activity patterns, recreating the work of the human brain. Currently,
there is an ambitious project that aims to create a fullfledged artificial mouse brain [5]. Moreover, the second
group includes such tasks as: using motor biorhythms for
neural control in robotics [6–8], controlling human movements (bioprosthetics, functional restoration of mobility)
[9], understanding learning processes and memory effects
[10–12], creating brain-computer interfaces [13–17], etc.
Therefore, hardware development of bio-inspired SNN
is very vital and promising. For this reason, it is crucial to recognise the current progress and conditions for
the development of this field, taking into account the immense amount of information that is growing every day.
Moreover, in terms of signalling, SNN is better suited to
hardware implementation than artificial neural networks
(ANN), since neurons are only active at the time when
a voltage spike is generated, which reduces the overall
power consumption of the network and simplifies computation.
Figure 1 illustrates the intensification of work on the
topic over the last decades. This is the period with a
significant increase in publication activity. Here we show
the analysis of publication activity (indexed in Dimensions and OpenAlex databases) on the topic of spiking neural networks and on the topic of spiking neural
networks filtered by the keywords “bio-inspired”. Since
around 2016, there has been a significant increase in interest in the topic of spiking neural networks as well as
in the topic of bio-inspired networks. All studies pre-

2
tems.
The brief conclusion is that there is no single approach
has overwhelming advantages at the current moment,
and it is quite likely that the necessary direction of development of the field has not yet been found. However, we
can already say with certainty that the hybrid approach
can provide some success in the formation of complex
deep spiking neuromorphic networks.

II. MATHEMATICAL FUNDAMENTALS OF
BIO-INSPIRED SPIKING NEURAL NETWORKS

FIG. 1. The number of publications histograms based on data
from Dimensions and OpenAlex databases from a search on
the topic “spiking neural network” (light blue histogram) and
a search filtered by the keyword “bio-inspired” (light green
histogram), presented retrospectively from the year 2000.

sented in these publications have been carried out for different implementations of SNNs: software, complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor, or, shortly, CMOS (especially memristor-based), superconducting, optical, and
hybrid ones.
In this paper, we review the advances in different hardware directions of bio-inspired spiking neural network
evolution and provide a brief summary of the future of
the field, its advantages, challenges, and drawbacks. Furthermore we have reviewed the basic software implementations of SNNs.
The first part of this review is devoted to the mathematical foundations of bio-inspired spiking neural networks, their idea and software realisation. The second
part is dedicated to the CMOS-based bio-inspired neuromorphic circuits, where we have talked about semiconducting and memristive realisations. The third part is
devoted to superconducting realisations, not of the whole
network, but of its elements and some of its functional
parts. Finally, we have considered bio-inspired elements
for optical neuromorphic systems and provide a brief discussion of each area of activity as well as a general conclusion on the evolution of bio-inspired neuromorphic sys-

A spiking neural network is fundamentally different
from the second generation of neural networks: instead
of continuously changing values over time, such a network works with discrete events (chains of events) that
occur at specific points in time. Discrete events are encoded by impulses (spikes) received at the input of the
neural network and processed by it in a specific way, as
shown in figure 2. The output of such a network is also
a sequence of spikes, encoding the result of the network’s
activity. In a real neuron, the transmission of impulses is
described by differential equations that correspond to the
physical and chemical processes of action potential formation. When the action potential reaches its threshold,
the neuron generates a spike and the membrane potential returns to its initial level, see figure 2(a). An accurate representation of neuronal activity and its response
to various input signals requires a general mathematical
model that describes all the necessary processes associated with its spike activity and action potential formation, while remaining sufficiently simple for its successful
use in various applications.

A.

Mathematical models of bio-inspired neurons
and networks
1.

Hodgkin-Huxley model

The discussion of applications begins with the simplest
and most studied software implementations of SNNs: the
most popular way to describe the initiation and propagation of action potentials in neurons is the HodgkinHuxley (HH) model [19].
The HH model is treated as a conductance-based system where each neuron is a circuit of parallel capacitors
and resistors [20] and describes how action potential in
nerve cells (neurons) is emerged and propagated. Basically, HH model contains [21] four components of the
current flowing through the neuron membrane, formed by
lipid bilayer and possessing of potential Vm : the current
flowing through the lipid bilayer (Ic ), currents flowing
through the ion channels (IN a and IK ), and the leakage
current (Il ). The lipid bilayer – nerve cell membrane – is
introduced in the form of the capacitance Cm , ion-gated

3
channel – by the conductance gi (where i is a corresponding ion) per unit area and leakage current introduced by
the conductance gl per unit area. Thus, for a cell model
that contains only sodium and potassium ion channels,
the total current flowing through the membrane is described by the following equation
dVm
+gK (Vm −VK )+gN a (Vm −VN a )+gl (Vm −Vl ).
dt
(1)
Of course, the biochemical processes in the living nerve
cell are more complicated and therefore the HH model
could be modified by adding extra terms for other ions
(Cl− or Ca++ , for example) or by using non-linear conductance models (gi = f (t, V )) instead of constant values.
I = Cm

Extracellular

Intracellular

FIG. 3. [22] Electrical analog of the Hodgkin-Huxley model.
The capacitance Cm represents a lipid bilayer – neuron membrane with potential Vm . Non-linear electrical conductances
resemble voltage-gated ion channels gK+ and gN a+ , while
gLeak corresponds to the leakage channel. Parameters EN a+ ,
EK+ , and ELeak correspond to the reversal ions potentials
and leak reversal potential, respectively.

2.

FIG. 2. [18] a - Illustration of a biological neuron and its
operating principles. b - Conventional ANN operating principle (top) and output representation (bottom). The input
vector is processed by multiplying the input vector by the
corresponding weight vector (denoted W ) and then passing
it to the activation function. Output values are represented
in floating-point numbers that can be processed at the software level. c - Operating principle of a spiking neural network
(top) and output representation (bottom). The input signal
is processed by the hardware implementation of the neuron.
Output values are represented in spike trains, which differ in
the emission time of each spike and the overall density, and
also serve as inherent memory.

Izhikevich model

One of the most computation-efficient and simultaneously accurately representative for neurons’ activity is
the Izhikevich model. According to Ref. [23], bifurcation
methodologies [24] enable us to reduce many biophysically accurate Hodgkin–Huxley-type neuronal models to
a two-dimensional (2-D) system of ordinary differential
equations
(
v̇ = 0.04v 2 + 5v + 104 − u + I,
(2)
u̇ = a(bv − u),
with the auxiliary after-spike resetting
(
v ← c,
if v ≥ 30mV, then
u ← u + d.

(3)

4
Here, v and u are variables, a, b, c, d are parameters,
and dot notation is the time derivative. Neuron’s membrane potential and recovery are described by v and u,
and when v reaches its maximum value of +30mV , u
is restored, see Eq. (3). They are affected by the parameter b which describes recovery variable sensitivity to
sub-threshold fluctuations of v, promoting possible lowthreshold oscillations when increased. The case b < a
(b > a) corresponds to saddle-node (Andronov–Hopf) bifurcation of the resting state. Variable u is also affected
by the parameter a which stands for the time scale of the
variable, speeding up or slowing down recovery, and the
parameter d, which is responsible for after-spike reset of
u caused by slow high-threshold N a+ and K + conductances. Fast high-threshold K + conductances affect on v
is expressed in the remaining parameter c, that describes
the after-spike reset value of v.
The combination 0.04v 2 + 5v + 140 provides scaling
for membrane potential v to mV and ms scale and was
derived from fitting the initiation dynamics of the spike.
The resting potential in the model is between −70 and
−60 mV depending on the b. But in real practice, the
model does not have a fixed threshold, depending from
the value of v before the spike formation.
3.

Leaky Integrate-and-Fire Neuron Model

The really frequently used hardware model is implemented on principles of so-called Leaky Integrate-andFire (LIF) neurons. Such neurons, whose membrane potentials V evolve at time step t according to some variation of the following dynamics, described in following
manner [25]:
V[t] = λV[t − 1] + WX[t] − S[t]Vth ,

(4)

where λ ∈ [0, 1) is a membrane leakage constant, X is
an input (i.e., an external stimuli to the network or the
spiking activity from another neuron), W is a weight
matrix, and the binary spiking function
(
1, if V[t] > Vth
S[t] =
(5)
0, otherwise
is a function of the threshold voltage Vth .
B.

Coding information in SNN

The brain of a living being processes a wide variety
of information, which can come from different sensory
organs as well as signals from the nervous system of different internal organs. How does the brain understand
which signal comes from the optic nerve and which from
the auditory nerve, for example? There are different ways
of encoding incoming information, processing it by a specially trained neural network (a specific area in the brain)

and interpreting the results of the processing. In other
words, there are ways of encoding input and output signals. And both are very important: in the first case, the
information is encoded so that the system can work with
it, and in the second case, so that the general decisionmaking centre (the brain) can perceive or handle the
processed information. Two types of coding are generally used in artificial SNNs: rate coding and temporal
(or latency) coding, although there are others [26].
Rate coding converts input information intensity into
a “firing” rate or spike count. For example, a pixel in
some image, that has a specific RGB code and brightness, can be convert or coding into a Poisson train –
a sequence of spikes, based on this information (information of its intensity). There are several types of rate
coding: count rate coding, density rate coding and population rate coding. In terms of output interpretation, the
processing centre will select the one that has the highest
“firing” rate or spike count at a particular point in time.
Another natural principle of information coding is a
temporal (or latency) coding. One converts input intensity to a spike time, referring to spike timing and paying
attention to time moment when the spike has occurred.
The spike weighting ensures that different “firing” times
lead to different amount of information. The earlier a
spike arrives, the larger weight it carries, and the more
information it transmits to the post-synaptic neurons. In
terms of output interpretation, the processing centre selects the signal that, by a certain point in time, came
first (selects the signal from that output neuron among
other output neurons that fused first).
There is also another type of information coding called
delta modulation. This type of coding consists of converting the incoming analogue information signal into a
spike train of temporal changes in signal intensity (magnitude). For example, if the input signal is increasing, the
network input will receive spikes at a certain frequency,
which depends on the rate of increase of the signal (its
derivative) – the faster the signal increases in time, the
more frequent the spikes will be. Conversely, the signal
decreasing will be accompanied by the absence of spikes.
C.

SNN learning techniques

The complex dynamics of spike propagation over SNNs
makes it difficult to design a learning algorithm that gives
the best result. Currently, there are three main types of
methods for training spiking neural networks, as referred
in Ref. [26]: shadow training, backpropagation on spikes
training and training based on local learning rules.
1.

Shadow training

The idea of this shadow training technique is to use
the training algorithms of a conventional ANN to build
a spiking network by converting a trained ANN into a

5
trained SNN. This process takes place as follows: first,
the conventional ANN is trained, then the activation
function of each neuron in the ANN is replaced by a
separate operator that non-linearly transforms the signal
incoming to the neuron by the spike frequency or by the
delay between spikes. For example, conversion process
from convolutional neural network to SNN can be done
by manually reprogramming convolution kernel for spike
train inputs in order to make the SNN produce the same
output as the trained convolutional neural network [27].
At the same time, the net weights remain the same.
The main advantage of this training process is that
the most of the time we deal with an ANN, with all of its
benefits of training conventional neural networks. Such
approach is used in tasks related to that of ANNs that
aimed to image classification. Despite that, the process of
converting activation functions into spike trains usually
requires a large number of simulations time steps which
may deteriorate the initial idea of spiking neuron energy
efficiency. And, the most important one, is that conversion process is doing an approximation of activation,
negatively affecting the performance of a SNN. The last
further confirms the fact that other learning algorithms
need to be developed to train SNNs, till then SNNs will
remain just a shadow of ANNs.

2.

Backpropagation training

Backpropagation training algorithm for ANNs can also
be implemented for SNNs by calculating gradients of
weight change for every neuron. Implementations of this
algorithm for SNNs may vary since, according to original
ANNs backpropagation the learning requires to calculate
the derivative of the loss function. And as we know, the
uses of derivative over spikes is not the best idea, because spikes generation depends on membrane threshold
potential as a step-function and the derivative becomes
infinite. To avoid this, backpropagation techniques for
SNN take other neuron output signal parameters into account, i.e. backpropagation method using spikes utilises
changes of spike timing rate according to the network
weights change.
Backpropagation method has several advantages, such
as the high performance on data-driven tasks, low energy consumption, and high degree of similarity with
recurrent neural networks in terms of training process.
Despite the similarity with well-established ANN backpropagation method, the drawbacks of backpropagation
for SNNs method consist of several subjects. First of all,
this method can not fully replicate effectiveness of optimising a loss function, meaning that there is still an
accuracy gap between SNNs and ANNs, which remains
to be closed up for today. Additionally, once neurons become inactive during the training process, their weights
become frozen.
In some cases, there are alternative interpretations of
this algorithm, for example, such as the Forward Propa-

gation Through Time (FPTT) [28] which is used for recurrent SNN training. This algorithm is devoid of many
drawbacks that follow conventional backpropagation algorithm, removing the dependence on partial gradients
sum during the gradient calculation. The most peculiar
feature of this algorithm is that along with regular loss it
computes dynamic regularisation penalty, which is calculated on previously encountered loss value, transforming
recurrent nertwork training to resemble feed-forward network training.
3.

Local learning rules

Neurons are trained locally, treating local spatially
and temporary signal as an input for a single neuron’s
weight update function. Namely, backpropagation technique deals only with finite sequences of data, restricting
the temporal dependencies that can be learned. This algorithm also tries to compute gradients as it is done in
backpropagation, but does it through the computations
that make these gradient calculations temporally local.
However, this algorithm demands significantly more computations in comparison with backpropagation, which rejects the possibility of this algorithm to replace conventional backpropagation despite being more biologically
plausible.
The constraint imposed on brain-inspired learning algorithms is that the calculation of a gradient should, like
the forward pass, be temporally local, i.e. that they only
depend on values available at either present time. To address this, learning algorithms turn to their online counterparts that adhere to temporal locality. Real-time recurrent learning (RTRL) [29] proposed back in 1989 is
one prominent example.
D.

Towards hardware implementations of SNN

To extend the understanding of the concept of how
spiking neural networks work, in this section we will review a schematic process of solving the exclusive OR
(XOR) problem with a SNN on an example presented in
Ref. [30]. Since XOR is considered a fairly simple logic
gate, it will serve as an excellent demonstration of SNN
training and operation. In fact, operating with SNNs has
almost the same challenges as in training ANNs: for example, which data representation to choose to effectively
describe the problem, what structure should the network
have, how to interpret the network output and so on.
That is, we should guide our approach to a certain problem in the same way as it is done in ANNs on the general
scope, including the XOR problem.
The training process for the chosen task can be separated into several steps:
• Neuron model
Due to low complexity of this task, it is most efficient to use a simple neuron model as well. In that

6
case, the LIF model suits this problem the best
because its easy to control and does not produce
unwanted complexity.
• Data representation
Since we test the possibility of creating a network
of spiking neurons to perform logic gate operations,
the input data can be simply labeled in two inputs.
Each input has to carry its own representative frequency in order to be separable for the network.
Taking these statements into account, we can (for
example) define the frequency input values as 25
Hz for the Boolean Zero (“0”) and 51 Hz for the
Boolean One (“1”). These values are chosen as they
are decisively different from each other and can be
clearly represented visually.
• Structure
The Neural network structure represents the logic
gate as follows: two input neurons that encode any
combination of “0” and “1”, hidden layer neurons
represent any possible combination of 0’s and 1’s,
and output layer produces the predicted output, as
shown in figure 4.

FIG. 4. [30]SNN architecture for the XOR problem solving.
Input neurons A and B can receive any combination of “0” and
“1”. Each RF block demonstrates Receptive Field application
to neuron input/output. The number on hidden neurons layer
represent the combination of “0” and “1” they implied to respond to.

• RFF
To strengthen the response for designated frequencies for the corresponding neurons, Receptive
Fields filter (RFF) is added to every hidden layer
neurons’ connections. Adding the RFF helps neurons to detect particular frequencies, filtering the
ones that are outside their response range. The
2
RFF formula is kij = e−((xm −y0 )/dm ) where kij is
a scalar variable which will modify the output spike
train frequency of the related neuron, xm is the operating frequency of the RFF, y0 is the input spike
train frequency to the RFF and dm denotes the
width of the RFF, allowing the filter to distinguish
more frequencies.
• Input encoding
The input frequencies are encoded into linear spike

trains, i.e. the value of the distance between the
action potentials, known as the inter spike interval
(ISI), is treated to be a constant. The network was
designed to take advantage of the precise timing
between action potentials. If the ISIs on input A
are synchronised with the ISIs on input B, it means
that both inputs have identical frequency.
• Training
Usage of RFF is an effective and biologically plausible way to reduce complexity and fault vulnerability in this problem. Because of that, as well
as small number of neurons, manual fine-tuning of
thresholds and weights will be enough to train the
network to produce accurate results, successfully
recognising all possible XOR combinations. However, upon increasing the size of the network, implementing one of network training algorithms will
be inevitable.
For conclusion to this example it is important to highlight that one should pay attention to training process
workflow and investigate the problem deeply to be able
to recognise all the obstacles that may be encountered
during training (i.e. in the XOR problem proper signal frequency interpretation would not be possible without RFF). Considering the training workflow, the most
important parts of this are the neuron model and input/output coding, since it can determine crucial aspects
of problem interpretation from network implementation’s
point of view. Conversely, network training algorithms
for weights optimisation play lesser role in this process,
because they can only affect computational complexity
to be performed and their influence on results accuracy
becomes noticeable only if the task implies implementing
state-of-the-art network or results close to it.
III. CMOS-BASED BIO-INSPIRED
NEUROMORPHIC CIRCUITS

The last decades of electronics and electrical engineering are clearly associated with the development of the
conventional complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS) technology [31, 32]. Semiconductors are well
established in many devices that we use 7 days a week,
all year round. It is therefore not surprising to see variations in the hardware implementation of SNNs based on
semiconductor elements. Globally, all CMOS SNN implementation options can be divided into two parts, with
the focus on either transistors or memristors. Examples
of semiconductor implementations of neuron circuits are
shown in figure 5. Two CMOS solutions for implementing the functions of the single neuron model developed by
IBM (for TrueNorth) and Stanford University (for Neurogrid) are presented here. In both cases, the realisation of
the functions of even a single neuron (more precisely, the
neuron soma) requires the involvement of a large number
of elements.

7

FIG. 5. Semiconductor solutions for realising bio-inspired
neuron functions: (a) TrueNorth neuron circuit [33], (b) buffer
gate, (c) controlled split gate, (d) non-deterministic merge
gate, (e) Neurogrid neuron’s soma circuit [34]

A.

Silicon-based neuron: operation

As might be expected, the realisation of spike sequence
generation in CMOS technology differs from the way it
is done in software models. Since semiconductor circuits
operate with voltage levels, generating a spike as a nonlinear voltage response requires some tricks. To better
understand how SNNs work at the hardware level and
how spike formation occurs, let us briefly review the operation of the basic elements of such networks, which are
isomorphic to ion-gated channels [31, 35].

1.

Realisation of ion-gated mechanisms

The goal of creating semiconductor models of neuromorphic spiking neural networks is to reproduce the biochemical dynamics of ionic processes in living cells. The
first step is to reproduce the ion-gated channels responsible for the different voltage response patterns. The
Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) neuron model discussed above is
essentially a thermodynamic model of ion channels. The
channel model consists of a number of independent gating particles that can adopt two states (open or closed)
which determine the permeability of the channel. The
HH variable represents the probability that a particle is
in the open state or, in population terms, the fraction of
particles in the open state.
In a steady state, the total number of opening particles
(the opening flux, which depends on the number of closed

channels and the opening rate) is balanced by the total
number of closing particles (the closing flux). A change
in the membrane voltage (or potential) causes an increase
in the rate of one of the transitions, which in turn causes
an increase in the corresponding flux of particles, thereby
modifying the overall state of the system. The system
will then reach a new steady state with a new ratio of
open to closed channels, thus ensuring that the fluxes
are once again in equilibrium.
This situation becomes even clearer if we consider it
from the perspective of energy balance. Indeed, a change
in the voltage on the membrane is equivalent to a change
in the electric field across it. Then the equilibrium state
of the system depends on the energy difference between
the particles in the different states: if this difference is
zero and the transition rates are the same, the particles
are equally distributed between the two states. Otherwise, the state with lower energy will be preferred and
the system will tend to move to it. Note that in the HH
model, the change in the population of energy states is exponential in time. A similar situation is with the density
of charge carriers at the source and drain of the transistor
channel, the value of which also depends exponentially on
the size of the energy barriers. These energy barriers exist due to the inherent potential difference (electric field)
between the channel and the source or drain. Varying
the source or drain voltage changes the energy level of
the charge carriers.
The similarity of the physics underlying the operation
of neuronal ion channels and transistors allows us to use
transistors as thermodynamic imitators of ion channels.
In both cases, there is a direct relationship between the
energy barrier and the control voltage. In an ion channel,
isolated charges must overcome the electric field generated by the voltage across the membrane. For a transistor, electrons or holes must overcome the electric field
created by the voltage difference between the source, or
drain, and the transistor channel. In both of these cases,
the charge transfer across the energy barrier is governed
by the Boltzmann distribution, resulting in an exponential voltage dependence [36]. To model the closing and
opening fluxes, we need to use at least two transistors,
the difference of signals from which must be integrated
to model the state of the system as a whole. A capacitor (Cu ) does the integration, assuming that the charge
represents the number of particles and the current represents the flux. The voltage on this capacitor is linearly
proportional to its charge gives the result. K. Hynna and
K. Boahen (2007) suggested the following circuit (figure 6, to simulate a voltage-driven ion channel. Each
transistor defines an energy barrier for one of the transition rates: transistor N 1 uses its source and gate voltages (uL and VCLOSE , respectively) to define the closing rate, and transistor N 2 uses its drain and gate voltages (uH and VOP EN ) to define the opening rate (where
uH > uL ). The difference in transistors currents is collected on the capacitor Cu . The magnitude of the energy
barriers is independent of the capacitor voltage uV , so

8

FIG. 6. (a) Voltage-Dependent Silicon Ion Channel Model
based on two transistors [36] and (b) simulation of steady
state voltage level (uV ) versus the membrane voltage (V ).
Note that VOP EN and VCLOSE are proportional to V and
−V respectively.

the value of uV indicates the fraction of open channels
and increases as the particles switch more and more to
the open state. The variable’s steady-state value changes
sigmoidally with membrane voltage, dictated by the ratio
of the opening and closing rates.

2.

Integrate-and-fire neuron realisation

Now we are ready to understand the membrane voltage
and spike formation. The explanation of these processes
will be conducted based on a model of an integrate-andfire neuron realised using MOSFETs (M 1, M 2, M 3), capacitance (Cmem ) and p − n − p − n diode (D0) [37],
shown in figure 7a. The designated components perform
the following roles: Cmem contributes to the increase in
the membrane voltage (Vmem ); D0 generates spike voltages (VSP IKE ); M 1 acts as a resistor and the resistance
contributes to the determination of the VSP IKE value;
M 2 and M 3 are responsible for resetting the spiking and
membrane voltages, respectively.
The presented neuron circuit operation begins with the
flow of synaptic current pulses (step 1) from pre-synaptic
devices into the neuron circuit. Charges carried by the
input current are integrated into Cmem . The temporal
integration of charges increases Vmem which is the anode
voltage of D0 (step 2). VSP IKE is abruptly generated
when Vmem reaches a triggering threshold voltage for the
latch-up of the anode current of the diode (step 3). The
VSP IKE value is determined by the voltage division of
the diode and M 1. The generation of VSP IKE supplies
the gate voltages to M 2 and M 3 and opens the channels
of these transistors (step 4). The discharge current flows
from Cmem to the ground through the M3 channel (step
5), and this flow rapidly decreases Vmem (step 6). Simultaneously, the reset current flows from the cathode of D0
to the ground through the M 2 channel (step 5). Eventually, the opening of the M 2 and M 3 channels resets the
anode and cathode voltages to zero (step 6), and accordingly VSP IKE becomes zero. Thus, the latch-up of D0
and the subsequent opening of the M 2 and M 3 channels
cause the presented neuron circuit to fire VSP IKE pulses

FIG. 7. (a) Integrate-and-fire neuron circuit with the illustration of the operation mechanism and (b) the dependence
of membrane current on membrane voltage [37]
.

toward post-synaptic devices [37].
Figure 7b illustrates the manner in which the membrane current changes with the membrane voltage during
the charging and discharging of Cmem . We can see that
the neuron circuit mimics the (1) temporal integration,
(2) trigger threshold, (3) depolarisation, (4) repolarisation and (5) refractory period of a biological neuron. The
membrane current does not flow during the temporal integration of charges in Cmem (step 1 in figure 7). When
the temporal integration reaches the threshold voltage
(steps 2 and 4), the membrane current increases abruptly
(step 3). This moment corresponds to the depolarisation
of the electrical action potential in a biological neuron.
Discharging Cmem after depolarisation (step 5) results
in a rapid and then gradual decrease in membrane current (step 6), which corresponds to the repolarisation of
the electrical action potential in a biological neuron. As
the membrane current becomes negligible, the presented
neuron circuit remains in the refractory period [37].

9
3.

Izhikevich neuron model with silicon-based realisation

In 2008 Jayawan H.B. Wijekoon and Piotr Dudek
suggested the circuit that implements the cortical neuron (figure 8) [38], inspired by the mathematical neuron model proposed by Izhikevich in 2003. The circuit
contains 14 MOSFETs, based on which three blocks are
operating: membrane potential circuitry (transistors M 1
-– M 5 and the capacitance Cv ), slow variable circuitry
(transistors M 1, M 2 and M 6 – M 8) and comparator
circuitry (M 9 – M 14).
Cv integrated a positive feedback current that generate spikes (generated by M 3 and flowing from one to Cv ),
leakage current (generated by M 4) and post-synaptic input current (excitatory or inhibitory). If a spike is generated, it is detected by the comparator circuit which
provides a reset pulse on the gate of M 5 that rapidly
hyperpolarises the membrane potential (V on Cv ) to a
value determined by the voltage at node c. The transistor M 5 size is designed so that the capacitor Cv is
fully discharge during the voltage pulse coming from the
comparator circuit by feedback loop (to the gate of M 5).
The slow variable circuit works as follows. The magnitude of the current supplied by M 7 is determined by the
membrane potential (voltage at Cv ), in a manner analogous to that observed in the membrane circuit. The
scaling of transistors M3 and M7 ensures that the drain
current of M7 is less than that of M3, while the capacitance value of Cu is selected to be greater than that of
Cv . This guarantees that the potential at Cu varies more
slowly than at Cv . The sum of these currents is integrated across the slow variable capacitor, designated as
Cu . Additionally, following a membrane potential spike,
the comparator (right part of figure 8) generates a voltage pulse (arriving at the base of M 8) that opens the
transistor, identified as M 8. The modest dimensions of
M8 and the brief duration of the voltage pulse that opens
it guarantee that the capacitance Cu is not entirely reset to V( dd). Instead, an additional quantity of charge,
regulated by V( dd), is transferred to Cu . It can be demonstrated that each membrane spike results in a rapid increase in the slow variable potential. This, in turn, gives
rise to an increase in the leakage current of the membrane potential, which in turn causes a slowing down of
the depolarisation following the spike.
In the comparator circuit, the voltage VT HD is responsible for detecting the membrane potential threshold when a spike is coming. The voltage VBIAS controls
the bias current in the comparator. When the membrane
potential rises above VT HD , the voltage at the M 8 gate
is decreased and the voltage at the M 5 gate is increased,
generating reset signals. The reset signal is delayed, so
the membrane potential V (in the membrane potential
circuit at Cv ) continues to rise beyond VT HD , up to Vdd ,
but as soon as the voltage at M 5 gate is increased, the
membrane potential is reset to Vc , which is lower than
VT HD . Next, the voltages at the M 5 and M 8 gates return to their resting voltage levels, completing the reset

FIG. 8. Illustration of the cortical neuron circuit, based on
14 MOSFETs and emulated Izhikevich neuron model [38]

FIG. 9. Experimental firing patterns obtained from the fabricated chip containing 202 neurons using 0.35 µm CMOS
technology. Demonstrated patterns are responses to the input current step for various parameters of bias voltages at
node c and node d [38].

pulses. Transistor M 14 increases the comparator current
during the spike, providing the required amplitude and
duration of the reset pulse of the voltage at gate M 8 [38].
The basic circuit comprises 202 neurons with different
circuit parameters, including transistor and capacitance
sizes. Fabrication was conducted using 0.35 m CMOS
technology. Since the transistors in this circuit operate
mainly in strong inversion mode, the excitation patterns
are on an "accelerated" time scale, about 104 faster than
biological real time. The power consumption of the circuit is less than 10 pJ per spike [31, 38]. Main types
of characteristic firing patterns of suggested circuit are
demonstrated in figure 9.

10
B.

Transistor-based realisations

This section is devoted to reviewing such significant
projects as SpiNNaker, Neurogrid, TrueNorth, NorthPole
and Loihi. And despite the fact that at the moment
of IBM’s chip creation there were already such projects
as SpiNNaker (2012) [39] and Neurogrid (2014) [34], we
will start with the review of the TrueNorth neuromorphic
processor, since in our opinion it was the first hardware
implementation of the idea of neuromorphic computing.

efficiency of 6100 – 7350 F P S. TrueNorth multi-chip implementations on a single board process 32×32 colour images at 430 – 1330 per second and consume 0.89 – 1.5 W ,
yielding an energy efficiency of 360 − −1420 F P S/W .
SpiNNaker delivers 167 F P S/W while processing 28×28
grayscale images (in a configuration of 48 chips on one
board) [41]. Tegra K1 GPU, Titan X GPU and Core
i7 CPU deliver 45, 14.2 and 3.9 F P S/W , respectively,
while processing 224×224 colour images [40, 42].

2.
1.

SpiNNaker

TrueNorth

The field of brain-inspired technologies was marked
in 2015 by the release of the first neuromorphic chip:
IBM TrueNorth (figure 10a), a neuromorphic CMOS integrated circuit. The TrueNorth chip architecture is
based on an organic neurobiological structure, but with
the limitations of inorganic silicon technology. The main
purpose of this platform was to reproduce the work of
existing neural network algorithms of speech and image
recognition in real time with minimal energy consumption [33]. This neuromorphic chip contains 4096 neurosynaptic nuclei combined into a two-dimensional array, and contains a total of 1 million neurons and 256
million synapses. The chip has a peak computing performance of 58 GSOP S with a power consumption of
400 GSOP S/W .
The use of the term "neuromorphic" itself implies that
the chip is based on an architecture that differs from
the familiar von Neumann architecture. Unlike von Neumann machines, the TrueNorth chip does not use sequential programs that map instructions into linear memory.
The chip consists of spiking neurons, which are connected in a network and communicate with each other
via spikes (voltage pulses). Communication between neurons is tunable, and the data transmitted can be encoded
by the frequency, temporal and spatial distribution of
the spikes. TrueNorth is designed for a specific set of
tasks: sensory processing, machine learning and cognitive computing. However, just as in the early days of the
computer age and the emergence of the first computer
chips, the challenges of creating efficient neurosynaptic
systems and optimising them in terms of programming
models, algorithms and architectural features are still being solved. Currently, the IBM Truenorth chip is being
used by DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency) for gesture and speech recognition.
An IBM Research blog post on TrueNorth’s performance notes that the classification accuracy demonstrated by the system is approaching the performance of
2016 state-of-the-art implementations, not only for image recognition but also for speech recognition. The
[40] reports performance data for five digital computing architectures running deep neural networks. A single
TrueNorth chip processes 1200-2600 32×32 colour images
per second, consuming 170–275 mW , yielding an energy

The SpiNNaker (Spiking Neural Network Architecture) project, the brainchild of the University of Manchester, was unveiled in January 2012. It is a real-time
microprocessor-based system optimised for the simulation of neural networks, and in particular spiking neural networks. Its main purpose is to improve the performance of software simulations [39, 43]. SpiNNaker
uses a custom chip based on ARM cores that integrates
18 microprocessors in 102 mm2 using a 130 nm process. The all-digital architecture uses an asynchronous
message-passing network (2-D torus) for inter-chip communication, allowing the whole system to scale almost
infinitely. In experiments [41, 44, 45] a 48-chip board
(see figure 10d) was used, which can simulate hundreds
of thousands of neurons and tens of millions of synapses,
and consumes about 27-37 W in real time (for different
neuron models a network configuration). On average,
2000 spikes formed into a Poisson train were used to encode a digit character from the MNIST dataset, with a
classification latency of 20 ms.
In summary, SpiNNaker is a high-performance,
application-specific architecture optimised for tasks from
neurobiology and neuroscience in general. It is claimed
that the system can also be used for other distributed
computing applications such as ray tracing and protein
folding [44]. The experimental studies performed suggest that for parallel modelling of deep neural networks,
a dedicated multi-core architecture can indeed be energy
efficient (compared to competitors and general purpose
systems) while maintaining the flexibility of softwareimplementable models of neurons and synapses.
In 2021 the second generation of neuromorphic chip
by the collaboration of Technische University of Dresden and University of Manchester was released – SpiNNaker2. Its development was conducted within the European Union flagship project “Human Brain Project”.
The overall approach utilised in the creation of SpiNNaker2 has the following parts: keep the processor-based
flexibility of SpiNNaker1, don’t do everything in software
in the processors, use the latest technologies and features
for energy efficiency and allow workload adaptivity on all
levels [43]. One SpiNNaker2 chip consists of 152 ARM
processors (processing elements) arranged in groups of
four to quad-processing-elements which are connected
by a Network-on-Chip (NoC) to allow scaling towards a

11
large neuromorphic System-on-Chip (SoC). The full-scale
SpiNNaker2 will consist of 10 million ARM cores distributed across 70000 сhips in 10 server racks. We’d also
highlight that the second generation is designed on a different technical process. Specifically, SpiNNaker1 was realised on 130 nm CMOS, while SpiNNaker2 was realised
on 22 nm FDSOI CMOS [46], which allowed not only
to increase the performance of a single chip as a whole,
but also to improve power efficiency. It is stated that
SpiNNaker2 enabling a 10× increase in neural simulation
capacity per watt over SpiNNaker1. Among the potential applications for the SpiNNaker2 the following stand
out: naturally, brain research and whole-brain modeling, biological neural simulations with complex plasticity
rules (with Spike-timing-dependent plasticity, STDP, for
example), low-power inferencing for robotics and embedded AI, large-scale execution of hybrid AI models, autonomous vehicles, and other real-time machine learning
applications.

3.

Neurogrid

The Neurogrid project, carried out at Stanford University in December 2013 [47], is a mixed analogue-digital
neuromorphic system based on a 180 nm CMOS process.
The project has two main components: software for interactive visualisation and hardware for real-time simulation. The main application of Neurogrid is the realtime simulation of large-scale neural models to realise the
function of biological neural systems by emulating their
structure [34].
The hardware part of Neurogrid contains 16 Neurocores connected in a binary tree: microelectronic chips
with a 12x14 mm2 die containing 23 million transistors
and 180 pads; a Cypress Semiconductor EZ-USB FX2LP
chip that handles USB communication with the host; a
Lattice ispMACH CPLD. This makes it possible to establish a link between the data transmitted via USB and the
data driven by Neurogrid, and to interleave timestamps
with the outgoing data (host binding). A daughter board
is responsible for primary axonal branching and is implemented using a field-programmable gate array (FPGA).
The Neurogrid board is shown in figure 10c. Each Neurocore implements a 256 × 256 silicon neuron array, and
also contains a transmitter, a receiver, a router, and two
RAMs. A neuron has one soma, one dendrite, four gating
variables and four synapse populations for shared synaptic and dendritic circuits [34].
The Neurogrid architecture enables to simulate cortical models emulating axonal arbors and dendritic trees:
a cortical area is modeled by a group of Neurocores mentioned above and an off-chip random-access memory is
programmed to replicate the neocortex’s function-specific
intercolumn connectivity [48]. Therefore,it is indeed simulate the behaviour of large neural structures, including conductance-based synapses, active membrane conductances, multiple dendritic compartments, spike back-

propagation, and cortical cell types. No data is available
on the power consumption of image recognition, as in
the case of TrueNorth or SpiNNaker, but that’s understandable: the main purpose of the project is to model
the neural activity of living tissues, and that’s what it
does. One thing we can say for sure is that the neurogrid
consumes less power than the GPU for the same simulation – 120 pJ versus 210 nJ per synaptic activation [49].
This confirms the thesis that digital simulation (on CPUs
or GPUs), even though it allows solving such problems,
but the time and power consumption will be significant
compared to specialised architectures.

4.

NorthPole

A striking example of a hardware implementation of a
semiconductor bio-inspired neural network is the recently
(2023) introduced NorthPole chip from IBM [50] (figure 10b). NorthPole is an extension of TrueNorth, and
it’s not surprising that it inherits some of the technology
used there. The NorthPole architecture is designed for
low-precision, common-sense computing while achieving
state-of-the-art inference accuracy for neural networks. It
is optimised for 8-, 4- and 2-bit precision, eliminating the
need for high precision during training. The NorthPole
system consists of a distributed modular array of cores,
with each core capable of massive parallelism, performing
8192 2-bit operations per cycle. Memory is distributed
between and within the cores, placing it in close proximity to the computation. This proximity allows each
core to take advantage of data locality, resulting in improved energy efficiency. NorthPole also incorporates a
large on-chip memory area that is neither centralised nor
hierarchically organised, further enhancing its efficiency.
Potentially, the NorthPole chip opens up new ways for
the development of intelligent data processing for tasks
such as optimisation (of systems, algorithms, scalability, etc.), for image processing for digital machine vision, and data recognition for autopilots, medical applications, etc. Also the chip was run in such well-known
tests as ResNet-50 image recognition and YOLOv4 object detection models, where it showed outstanding results: higher energy and space efficiency, and lower latency than any other chip available on the market today,
and is roughly 4000 times faster than TrueNorth (since
the requirements to the accuracy of calculations in the
chip are reduced, it is not possible to correctly estimate
the specific performance). The article [50] provides the
following data: NorthPole based on 12 nm node processing technology delivers 5 times more frames per joule
than GPU NVIDIA H100 based on 4 nm technological
process (571 vs. 116 F/J) and 1.5 times more than the
specialised for neural network use Qualcomm Cloud AI
100 based on 7 nm technological process. The reason
for this is the locality of the computation – by eliminating off-chip memory and intertwining on-chip memory
with compute memory, the locality of spatial computa-

12

FIG. 10.
Images of some CMOS spiking neural network
realisations: (a) IBM TrueNorth chip [33], (b) IBM NorthPole
chip [50], (c) Neurogrid board [47], (d) SpiNNaker (spiking
neural network architecture), a massively parallel, manycore
supercomputer architecture [45].

tion is ensured and, as a result, energy efficiency is increased. Also low-precision operations further increase
NorthPole’s lead over its competitors.
In original paper [50] D.S. Modha and his team tested
NorthPole only for use in computer vision. However, with
this sort of potential, this chip can also be used for image segmentation and video classification. According to
the information on the IBM’s blog it was also tested in
other areas, such as natural language processing (on the
encoder-only BERT model) and speech recognition (on
the DeepSpeech2 model).

5.

Loihi and Loihi2

In 2018, Intel Labs unveiled the first neuromorphic
manycore processor that enables on-chip learning and
aims to model spiking neural networks in silicon. The
name of this processor is Loihi (figure 11a). Technologically, Loihi is a 60 mm2 chip manufactured in Intel’s
FinFET 14 nm process. The chip instantiates a total of
2.07 billion transistors and 33 MB of SRAM across its
128 neuromorphic cores and three x86 cores to manage
the neuro cores and control spike traffic in and out of the
chip. It supports asynchronous spiking neural network
models for up to 130000 synthetic compartmental neurons and 130 million synapses. Loihi’s architecture is designed to enable the mapping of deep convolutional networks optimised for vision and audio recognition tasks.
Loihi was the first of its kind to feature on-chip learning
via a microcode-based learning rule engine within each
neural core, with fully programmable learning rules based

on spike timing. Intel’s chip allows the SNN to incorporate: 1) stochastic noise, 2) configurable and adaptable
synaptic, axonal and refractory delays, 3) configurable
dendritic tree processing, 4) neuron threshold adaptation
to support intrinsic excitability homeostasis, and 5) scaling and saturation of synaptic weights to support “permanence” levels beyond the range of weights used during
inference [51, 52].
The on-chip learning is organised in such a way that the
minimum of the loss function over a set of training samples is achieved during the training process. Also, learning rules satisfies the locality constraint: each weight can
only be accessed and modified by the destination neuron,
and the rule can only use locally available information,
such as the spike trains from the pre-synaptic (source)
and post-synaptic (destination) neurons. Loihi was the
first fully integrated digital SNN chip that supported diverse local information for programmable synaptic learning process such as: 1) spike traces corresponding to
filtered presynaptic and postsynaptic spike trains with
configurable time constants, 2) multiple spike traces for
a given spike train filtered with different time constants,
3) two additional state variables per synapse, besides the
normal weight, to provide more flexibility for learning
and 4) reward traces that correspond to special reward
spikes carrying signed impulse values to represent reward
or punishment signals for reinforcement learning [51].
In Intel Labs original work the performance of Loihi
was checked on the LASSO task (l1 -minimising sparse
coding problem). The goal of this task is to determine
the sparse set of coefficients that best represents a given
input signal as a linear combination of features from a
feature dictionary [51]. This task was solved on a 52 × 52
image with a dictionary of 224 atoms and during that the
Loihi allowed to provide 18 times compression of synaptic
resources for this network. The sparse coding problem
was solved to within 1% of the optimal solution. Unfortunately, the article does not provide data on energy
efficiency and speed of the chip when solving this problem. A bit later in [52] the classical classification task on
MNIST dataset was solved with accuracy of 96.4%.
On 30 September in 2021 Intel Labs introduced their
second-generation neuromorphic research chip Loihi 2
(figure 11(b)), as well as the open-source software framework LAVA for developing neuro-inspired applications.
Based on the Loihi experience, Loihi 2 supports new
classes of neuro-inspired algorithms and applications,
while providing up to 10 times faster processing, up to 15
times greater resource density with up to 1 million neurons per chip, and improved energy efficiency [53]. Loihi
2 has the same base architecture as its predecessor Loihi,
but with new functionality and improvements. For example, the new chip supports fully programmable neuron
models with graded spikes (Loihi supported only generalised LIF neuron model with binary spikes, whereas
Loihi 2 supports any you like models) and achieves a 2×
higher synaptic density. The [54] reports a comparison of
the performance and energy efficiency of the Loihi 2 chip

13

FIG. 11. (a) Loihi chip plot and (b) Intel’s the secondgeneration neuromorphic research chip Loihi 2 (pictures from
the Intel’s official website from the News about "Intel Advances Neuromorphic with Loihi 2, New Lava Software Framework and New Partners")

compared to the performance of the the NVIDIA Jetson
Orin Nano on video and audio processing task. Computing neuromorphic systems based on the Loihi 2 provide
significant gains in energy efficiency, latency, and even
throughput for intelligent signal processing applications
(such as navigation and autopilot systems, voice recognition systems) compared to conventional architectures.
For example, the Loihi 2 implementation of the Intel
NSSDNet (Nonlocal Spectral Similarity-induced Decomposition Network) increases its power advantage to 74×
compared to NsNet2 (Noise Suppression Net 2) running
on the Jetson Orin Nano platform. The Loihi 2 has also
demonstrated their advantages in Locally Competitive
Algorithm implementation [55]. Loihi 2 is also capable
of reproducing bio-realistic neural network implementation and it is flexible in terms of supporting different
neuron models. In [56] authors demonstrate a showcase
of implementing a simplified bio-realistic basal ganglia
neural network that carries “Go/No-Go” task, by using
Izhikevich neurons.

C.

Memristor-based realisations

A memristor is the fourth passive element of electrical
circuits. This element is a two-terminal device, the main
property of which is the ability to memorise its state depending on the applied bias current. Theoretically proposed by Leon Chua in 1971 [57], the memristor has seen
the daylight as a prototype (memory + resistor) based
on a thin film of titanium dioxide in 2008 thanks to HP
Labs company [58]. The reason for the development of
this device in the first place was the following problem:
to further improve the efficiency of computing, electronic
devices must be scalable to reduce manufacturing costs,
increase speed and reduce power consumption – that is,
more and more transistors must be placed on the same
area of the crystal each time. However, due to physical
limitations and rising manufacturing costs when moving
to new process standards (to a 10 nm process, for example), the processing nodes of a traditional CMOS transis-

FIG. 12. Illustration of the artificial neuron based on a diffusive memristor, consisting of a SiOx Ny : Ag layer between
two Pt electrodes [63].

tor can no longer scale cost-effectively and sustainably.
As a result, new electronic devices with higher performance and energy efficiency have become necessary to
satisfy the needs of the ever-growing information technology market [59], implementing new “non-von Neumann”
paradigms of in-memory computation [60, 61].
Initially, memristive systems acted as elements of
energy-efficient Resistive Random-Access Memory memory (RRAM) by using two metastable states with high
and low resistance, switching between which is carried
out by applying an external voltage. However, in recent
years, the potential application of memristors can be used
to realise the functions of both synapses and neurons in
both ANNs and SNNs [62]. Figure 12 shows one of the
realisations of a memristor-based neuron. It exploits the
diffusion processes between two types of layers: dielectric SiOx Ny : Ag layer (doped with Ag nanoclusters)
and P t layer [63]. The SiOx Ny : Ag material serves as
the functional part of the memristor, allowing the creation of a model of the leaky integrate-and-fire neuron.
The diffusive memristor integrates the presynaptic signals (arriving at one of the P t electrodes) within a time
window and transitions to a low resistance state only
when a threshold is reached.
Using nanotechnology capabilities, it is possible to
miniaturise memristive electronic devices to units of
nanometers, which allows achieving a high density of elements on a chip. An important advantage of memristors
is their compatibility with CMOS technology: memristors can be organised fairly easily into a crossbar architecture that takes advantage of parallel in-memory computing. With nanoscale, two-terminal and semiconductor
memristor, memristor crossbars are characterised by high
element density and better energy efficiency than their
transistor counterparts. Due to this, this approach makes
it possible to implement memristive networks based on
2D- and 3D-integrated crossbar structures to increase the
speed of signal transmission [64–69]. This is why memristor crossbars are seen as a good candidate as a basis
for neuromorphic networks [70].
It is assumed that due to similar mechanisms of ion

14
exchange in biological nerve cells and memristors, the
last ones can mimic synapses and even neurons with sufficiently high accuracy. Since the capabilities of a neural
network are usually determined by its size (number of
neurons and inter-neuron connections), a scalable and
energy-efficient component base is required to create a
more powerful and energy-efficient system [71, 72]. There
have been many works aimed at studying the properties
of memristors in terms of their application as synaptic elements and neurons, and there have even been successes
in demonstrating the effect of synaptic plasticity [73] and
the operation of the integrate-and-fire neural model [74].
Also an artificial neuron based on the threshold switching and fabricated on the basis of N bOx material, has
been demonstrated. Such a neuron displays four critical
features: threshold-driven spiking, spatiotemporal integration, dynamic logic and gain modulation [75].
The dynamic characteristics of memristors in combination with their nonlinear resistance allow us to observe
the responses of the system to external stimulation [76].
At the same time, the stochastic properties of memristors due to interaction with the external environment [77]
can be used both for controlling metastable states and
for hardware design of SNN circuits [78]. The first experimental prototypes of SNNs based on memristors and
CMOS have already been created (synapses are realised
via memristor crossbars, and neurons - via semiconductor transistors) and they can “to a certain extent” emulate spike-timing dependent plasticity [79, 80]. However,
they are based on a simplified concept of synaptic plasticity based on overlapping pre- and postsynaptic adhesions [80], which has led to reduced energy efficiency and
rather complex technological design of SNN design circuits. Currently, approaches to overcome these problems
are being developed, for example, on the basis of complete rejection of analogue-digital and digital-analogue
transformations and creation of neuromorphic systems
in which all signal processing occurs in analogue form
[81] or by creating the concept of self-learning memristor
SNNs.
Unfortunately, to realise a fully-memristive neuromorphic neural network it is necessary to achieve a nonlinear dynamic signal processing. This challenge is so
far not overcome by memristors alone, and every memristive neural network proposal relies on the operation of
classical semiconductor transistors in one way or another.
Below we consider two interesting realisations of CMOS
memristive neural networks.

1.

Neuromorphic network based on diffusive memristors

In 2018 Zhongrui Wang and his colleagues presented
an artificial neural network implemented on diffusive
memristors (and also on transistors) that is capable to
solve pattern classification task with unsupervised learning [63]. Note that the network demonstrated in the paper, recognised only four letters ("U", "M", "A", "S"),

FIG. 13. (a) Microphotograph of the fully memristive spiking neural network, consisting of memristive synapse crossbar (in red frame) and memristive neurons (in blue frame).
(b) SEM microphotograph of a single memristive synapse.
(c) TEM (transmission electron microscopy) image of the
synapse cross-section with the structure of drift memristor,
P d/Hf Ox /T a. (d) SEM microphotograph of a single memristive neuron. (e) TEM image of the neuron cross-section
with the structure of diffusive memristors, P t/Ag/SiOx :
Ag/Ag/P t [63].

presented as 4-by-4 pixel images. Nevertheless, a working memristive network is a significant achievement and
shows the feasibility in principle of the idea of memristorbased neuromorphic hardware computing. In figure 12
demonstrated the central part of this network and artificial neuron in particular – diffusive memristor consisted
of a SiOx Ny : Ag layer between two P t electrodes and
serving as the neuron’s soma.
The most important difference between a diffusion
memristor and a traditional memristor is that once the
voltage is removed from the device terminals, it automatically returns to its original high-resistance state. The
dynamics of the diffusion process in a diffusion memristor has similar physical behaviour to biological Ca2+ dynamics, which can accurately mimic different temporal
synaptic and neuronal properties [71].
The diffusive memristor in the artificial neuron is very
different from non-volatile drift memristors or phasechange memory devices used as long-term resistive memory elements or synapses. The point is that the memristor processes the incoming signals within a certain
time window (characteristic time, which in the diffusive memristor model is determined by the Ag diffusion dynamics to dissolve the nanoparticle bridge and
return the neuron to its resting state) and then, only
when a threshold has been reached, transitions to a lowresistance state. Figure 13(a) shows an integrated chip
of the memristive neural network [63], consisting of a
one-transistor–one-memristor (figure 13(b,c)) synaptic 8by-8 array and eight diffusive memristor neurons (figure 13(d,e)). The synapses were created by combining
drift memristors with arrays of transistors. In this configuration, each memristor (i.e., the P d/Hf O2 /T a structure) is connected to a series of n-type enhancementmode transistors. When all the transistors are in an active state, the array functions as a fully connected memristor crossbar.

15
The input images are divided into four 2-by-2 pixel
subsets, where each pixel is assigned a specific pair of
voltages (equal in modulus but different in sign), depending on the colour and intensity of the pixel. Each resulting subset is expanded into a single-column input vector
comprising eight voltages. This input vector is then applied to the network, which consists of eight rows, at each
time step. For each possible subset, there is a corresponding convolution filter implemented using eight memristor
synapses per column. In total, there are eight filters in
an 8 × 8 array. The convolution of the eight filters for
each sub-image simultaneously results in the "firing" of
the corresponding neurons, which fulfil the role of ReLU.
Eight outputs of these "ReLUs" coupled with the 8-by-3
fully connected memristive crossbar, whose fan-out concentrates all spikes on the last layer of the neural network
consisting of 3 neurons ”firing” which corresponds to a
certain recognised image. It is claimed that the neuromorphic nature of the presented network is ensured due
to the realisation of the effect of spike-timing-dependent
plasticity (STDP) used in the learning process and reflected in the change in the resistance of memristors in
the crossbar when the next voltage pulse is passed. Despite the insufficient (in our opinion) representativeness
of the learning results, the network architecture and the
physics behind the used devices do not allow us to doubt
the presence of the STDP effect, considering that similar
effects were observed in memristors back in 2015 [82].

2.

STDP learning in partially memristive SNN

The next realisation of the memristive-based neural
network is proposed by M. Prezioso et al., who experimentally demonstrated operation and STDP learning in SNN, implemented with the passively integrated
(0T1R) memristive synapses connected to a silicon leaky
integrate-and-fire (LIF) neuron [79]. The experimental
setup consisted of 20 input neurons connected via 20
memristive crossbar-integrated synapses to a single LIF
neuron. The input neurons – one neuron for each row of
the memristive crossbar – are implemented using the offthe-shelf digital-to-analogue converter circuits. Synapses
are implemented by P t/Al2 O3 /T iO2−x /P t based memristors in a 20 × 20 crossbar array. In this SNN implementation there is only a single LIF output neuron that
connected to the third array column, while the other
columns are grounded. LIF neuron is also realised on
the custom-printed circuit board (see figure 14). This
arrangement allows connecting the crossbar lines either
to the input/output neurons during network operation
or to a switch matrix, which in turn is connected to the
parameter analyser, for device forming, testing, and conductance tuning. Once the threshold is reached, the LIF
neuron fires an arbitrary waveform generator. The characteristic duration of voltage spikes is on the order of 5
ms.
The neural network was trained to solve the coinci-

FIG. 14. a – The SEM top view image of the 20 memristive crossbar-integrated synapses connected to a single leakyintegrate-and-fire (LIF) neuron (schematic is shown). b – The
experimental setup of the LIF neuron implementation [79].

dence detection problem (the task of identifying correlated spiking activity) using the STDP learning mechanism, which allows training a single neuron to produce
an output pulse when it receives simultaneous (i.e., correlated) pulses from multiple input neurons. The relevance
of such a task is due to the fact that the coincidence detection mechanism is an integral part of various parts of
the nervous system, such as the auditory and visual cortex, and is generally believed to play a very important
role in brain function [83–85].
The conducted experiment has confirmed one of the
main challenges for SNN implementation with memristors – their device-to-device variations. This imposes its
own limitations on STDP learning, where it is important
to consider certain time intervals (windows). Ideally, all
synapses should be identical, and conductance updates
for them should occur in equal STDP windows. In reality, however, conductance updates differ significantly
between different memristive synapses, precisely because
of differences in device switching thresholds. SNNs usually operate with spikes of the same magnitude, which
allows to realise parallel updating of weights in several
devices in crossbar circuit designs. In this experiment,
the magnitude of the spikes was chosen based on the average switching threshold of the devices. Therefore, the
change of conductivity in devices with a larger switching
threshold was naturally smaller.
So, CMOS models provides great integration capabilities, while at the same time requiring high power supply
and a large number of auxiliary elements to achieve biorealism. Also for this technology it is still difficult to
achieve high parallelism in the system due to significant
interconnect losses. Meanwhile, important applications
based on semiconductor neuromorphic chips are already

16
being solved, and within the framework of the “Human
Brain Project”, the second generation of the spiking neural network architecture SpiNNaker has even been created. Creating and advancing higher performance and
energy efficient semiconductor chips is a very important
issue. There are broad areas where these devices may be
in high demand, primarily because of the possibility of
mobile deployment from smart bioprostheses and braincomputer interfaces to “thinking” robot-androids.
Memristors can achieve bio-realism with fewer components (the ionic nature of their functioning is similar
to that in neurons), but the technology of their manufacturing has not yet been refined and the problem of
device-to-device variations has not been solved. Therefore, at the moment, we should assume that memristors
will be an auxiliary tool for semiconductor technology. It
is not realistic to create a fully memristive neuromorphic
processor separately, but maybe it is not necessary?
At the device level, the energy required for computation and weight updates is minimal, as everything is
rooted in the presence or absence of voltage spike. At
the architecture level, computation is performed directly
at the point of information storage (neuromorphism and
rejection of von Neumann architecture), avoiding data
movement as is the case in traditional digital computers. In addition, potentially memristor networks have
the ability to directly process analogue information from
various external sensors and sensing devices, which will
further reduce processing time and power consumption.
The superconductor element base used to build neuromorphic systems, discussed below, has the same capability. Experimental implementation of large memristor
neural networks used for working with real data sets is at
an early stage of development compared to CMOS analogues [71]. And the device-to-device variation in memristors’ switching thresholds is still the major challenge.

IV. SUPERCONDUCTOR-BASED
BIO-INSPIRED ELEMENTS OF NEURAL
NETWORKS

Superconducting digital circuits are also an attractive
candidate for creating large-scale neuromorphic computing systems [86–88]. Their niche is in tasks that require both high performance and energy-efficient computing. Modern superconducting technologies make it
possible to perform logical operations at high frequencies, up to 50 GHz, with energy consumption in the order
of 10−19 − 10−20 J per operation [86, 89–93]. Superconducting devices [94] lend themselves to the creation of
highly distributed networks that offer greater parallelism
than the conventional approaches mentioned above. For
example, in a crossbar-based synaptic network, the resistive interconnection leads to performance degradation
and self-heating. In contrast, the zero-dissipation superconducting interconnection at cryogenic temperatures
provides a way to limit interconnection losses.

The main problem with superconductor-based technologies is their relatively low scalability. Recently, the
size of superconducting logic elements, the main part of
which is the Josephson junction (JJ) [95, 96], is about
0.2 µm2 (approximately 107 JJs per square centimeter)
[97–99]. This value is comparable to the size of a transistor at 28 nm process technology in 2020. At the
same time, superconducting hardware has a competitive
advantage over CMOS technology due to its ability to
exploit the third dimension in chip manufacturing processes. Incorporating vertically stacked Josephson inductors fabricated with self-shunted Josephson junctions in
SFQ-based circuits would increase circuit density with
minimal impact on circuit margins [100]. In addition, the
operating principles of Josephson digital circuits, which
manipulate magnetic flux quanta with associated picosecond voltage pulses, are very close to the ideas of spiking
neural networks.
Further development of the superconducting implementation of neuromorphic systems thus offers the
prospect of creating a neuronet that emulates the functioning of the brain with ultra-high performance, and at
the same time the neurons themselves prove to be relatively compact, since it is enough to use only a few heterostructures for the proper functioning of the cell.
The design of neurons and synapses using Josephson
junctions (JJs) and superconducting nanowires is discussed in the following subsections.
A.

Implementations based on Josephson junctions

This approach is based on the quantisation of magnetic flux in superconducting circuits. Moreover, the flux
quantum [101–103] can only enter and exit through a
weak link in the superconductor: the Josephson junction,
an analogue of an ion-permeable pore in the membrane
of a biological neuron. This fact is important because
studies of neural systems focus mainly on studying and
reproducing the behaviour of neurons, including complex
patterns of neuronal activity, their ”firings”. Just as biological neurons have a threshold voltage above which an
action potential is generated, a Josephson junction has
a threshold current, the Josephson junction critical current, Ic . When the current through the junction exceeds
this value, a voltage spike-like pulse is generated.
One of the most common ways to describe Josephson
junctions is the resistively shunted junction model, where
the junction can be replaced with an equivalent circuit of
three parallel elements: a Josephson junction, a resistor
and a capacitor [92]. The current through the Josephson
junction can be written as the sum of three currents:
IS + IN + ID = I,

(6)

where IS is the supercurrent governed by the Josephson
phase φ of the JJ (the current phase relation, CPR, is
an important property of the heterostructure), IN is the
normal component of the current, for which Ohm’s law

17
can be applied, and ID is the capacitive component of
the current. Based on the Josephson relations for current
components, we obtain a 2nd order differential equation
describing the phase dynamics of the Josephson junction:

Ic sin φ +

ℏC
ℏ
φ̇ +
φ̈ = I,
2eR
2e

(7)

where C and R are the capacitance and the normal resistance of the Josephson junction.
This equation is identical to that of a forced damped
pendulum, where the first term gives the torque due to
a “gravitational” potential, the second term is the damping term and the third term is the kinetic energy with
a mass promotional to C. The sum of all three terms is
the external torque corresponding to the applied current.
When a small torque below the critical value is applied,
the phase φ will increase and reach a static value. As the
phase gets close to π, there will be a probability that the
pendulum will go over the potential energy maximum,
resulting in the emission of a single flux quantum (SFQ)
pulse. When the applied current exceeds the critical current, the torque is enough to continually drive the pendulum over the potential energy maximum generating a
series of SFQ pulses.
The Josephson junction soma (figure 15a), or JJ soma,
proposed by Crotty et al. [104], is a circuit of two Josephson junctions connected in a loop which displays very
similar dynamics to the Hodgkin-Huxley model. The
two junctions behave phenomenologically like the sodium
and potassium channels, one allowing magnetic flux to
charge up the loop and the other allowing flux to discharge from the loop. The circuit exhibits many features
of biologically realistic neurons, including the evocation
of action potentials “firing” in response to input stimuli,
input strength thresholds below which no action potential is evoked, and refractory periods after “firing” during
which it is difficult to initiate another action potential.
Articles ([105–107]) discuss an improved version of
such a soma, where the input “pore” is represented as
an asymmetric interferometer (figure 15b). The main advantage of the 3JJ neuron is that its mode of operation is
easier to control. It has been shown that the 3JJ neuron
has a much wider range of parameters in which switching
between all operating modes (bursting, regular, dead, injury) is possible simply by controlling the bias current.
Furthermore, the 3JJ neuron can be made controllable
using identical Josephson junctions, and this design tolerates larger variations in the physical parameters of the
circuit elements.
Each element of the nervous system can be represented
by a similar behavior element of classical RSFQ logic
[108]. Complete architecture and comparison with the
biological archetype are shown in figure 16. This circuit
is driven by clocking regime in order to maintain stability when unforeseen side effects occur. One of the most
compelling capabilities of superconducting electronics is
its ability to support very high clock rates.

FIG. 15. (a) A sketch explaining the concept of the Josephson neuron: a superconducting circuit plays the role of a membrane impermeable to magnetic flux quanta; weak points of
Josephson junctions allow quanta to enter (and exit) the circuit. (b) By replacing one of the junctions with an asymmetric
quantum interferometer (SQUID) one enables control of the
ratio between the “widths” of the input and output channels.

FIG. 16. Schematic representation of the complete RSFQbased architecture, along with a comparison of each of its
components to the biological prototype. Here the JTLs act
as axons, the Josephson junction in the centre as soma.

1. Soma – Josephson Comparator (JC). This is a
clocked decision element that decides to let a single
flux quantum pass in response to a current driven
into source 1 in figure 16. The decision function of
the comparator is similar to the activation of a neuron in response to a current stimulus. Note that the
Josephson comparator has been widely used as a
nonlinear element in superconducting spiking neural networks [109, 110].
2. Axon – Josephson Transmission Line (JTL). The
transmission of the action potential originating
from the Soma to adjacent neurons can be carried
out by the Josephson Transmission Line (JTL). A
magnetic flux quantum can move along the JTL
with a short delay and low energy dissipation, and

18
its passage through the Josephson junction is accompanied by the appearance of a spike voltage
pulse on the heterostructures. This mechanism can
be likened to the process observed in biological systems, where the myelin sheath covering axons enables the action potential to “hop” from one point
to the next.
3. Synapse – Adaptive Josephson Transmission Line
(AJTL). Synapses exert an inhibitory or excitatory
influence on the postsynaptic neuron with respect
to the past activity of the pre- and post-synaptic
neuron. While memory is still difficult to implement in RSFQ technology, Feldhoff et al. [108]
have designed a short-term adaptation element that
sets a connection weight depending on the steady
state activity of the pre- and post-synaptic neuron. A common design element in RSFQ circuits
is a release junction to prevent congestion. A release junction is inserted into a JTL, making it controllable by two currents. As a result, the release
probability of an RSFQ from the JTL SQUID can
be controlled by the current flowing through the
junction. By driving the pulse sequence of the preand post-synaptic neuron through an L-R low-pass
filter, the current through the JJ output is a function of the pulse frequency and thus of the activity
level of both neurons. Thermal noise adds uncertainty to the junction switching and flux release
from the superconducting loop. This creates a continuous dependence of the SFQ transmission probability on the junction current balance. Recently
Feldhoff et. al. [111] have presented an improved
version of the synapse where the single junction is
replaced by a two junction SQUID, called a release
SQUID. This allows the critical current to be controlled by coupling an external magnetic field into
the release circuit. Since the flux can be stored
in another SQUID loop, the critical current can
be permanently adjusted, which changes the transmission probability of SFQs passing through the
synapse. This makes the synaptic connection more
transparent to the connected neurons. The realization of tunable synaptic interconnections is also
possible by utilizing adjustable kinetic inductance
[112].
To enable parallel processing in a network, it is necessary to have sufficient capabilities for both input (fanin) and output (fan-out) in the technology platform. To
address the issue of limited fan-in in JJ-based neuron
designs, Karamuftuoglu et al. introduced a high-fanin superconducting neuron [113]. The neuron design
includes multiple branches representing dendrites, with
each branch placed between two JJs that set the threshold of the neuron (see figure 17). This configuration allows for both positive and negative inductive coupling in
each input data branch, supporting both excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic data. The resistors on each branch

FIG. 17. Schematics of an advanced neuron proposed by
Karamuftuoglu et al. (right) and its input data branch structure that enables the high-fan-in feature (left)[113]

create leaky behaviour in the neuron. A three hidden
layer SNN using this neuron design achieved an accuracy
of 97.07% on the MNIST dataset. The network had a
throughput of 8.92 GHz and consumed only 1.5 nJ per
inference, including the energy required to cool the network to 4K [114].
Since memory storage is difficult to implement in
RSFQ technology, magnetic Josephson junctions can be
used to implement memory of past activity of pre- and
post-synaptic neurons. In these devices, the wavefunction of Cooper pair extends into the ferromagnetic layer
with a damped oscillatory behavior. Leveraging the
physics of the interacting order parameters, Schneider et
al. developed a new kind of synapse that utilizes a magnetic doped Josephson junction [115]. Inserting magnetic
nanoparticles into the insulating barrier between two superconductors allows for the adjustment of the Josephson
junction’s critical current. Since numerous particles can
be placed within the same barrier, each aligned in various
directions, the critical current can effectively vary across
a continuous range of values, making magnetic Josephson junctions an ideal memory element for the synaptic
strength.
The memristive Josephson junctions (MRJJ) can also
serve as a neuron-inspired device for neuromorphic computing. The paper by Wu et al. [116] investigates the
dynamic properties of neuron-like spiking, excitability
and bursting in the memristive Josephson junction and
its improved version (the inductive memristive Josephson junction, L-MRJJ). Equivalent circuits of MRJJ and
L-MRJJ are shown in figures 18a and 18b respectively.
The MRJJ model is able to reproduce the spiking dynamics of the FitzHugh-Nagumo neuron (FHN model).
Unlike the FHN model, the MRJJ model is bistable.
The two class excitabilities (class I and class II) in the
Morris-Lecar neuron are reproduced by the MRJJ model
based on the frequency-current curve. The L-MRJJ oscillator exhibits bursting modes analogous to the neuronal busting of the 3-D Hindmarsh-Rose (HR) model in
terms of purely dynamical behaviour, but there is a dis-

19

FIG. 18. (a) Equivalent circuit of a memristive Josephson
junction (MRJJ) with, in order, capacitor, Josephson nonlinear device, memristor. (b) A memristive Josephson junction
connected in parallel with an inductor (schematic with internal resistor, L-MRJJ) is able to mimic neuron-like bursting
behaviour.

crepancy between the two models. The generating origin of the bursting patterns depends on the saddle-node
and homoclinic bifurcation using a fast-slow decomposition method. The L-MRJJ model has infinite equilibria. The coupled L-MRJJ oscillators can achieve both inphase and antiphase burst synchronisation, similar to the
behaviour of coupled Hindmarsh-Rose neurons. During
burst synchronisation, the L-MRJJ network is partially
synchronised, but the HR network is fully synchronised.
Adjusting neuron threshold values in spiking neural
networks is important for optimizing network performance and accuracy, as this adjustment allows for finetuning the network’s behavior to specific input patterns.
Ucpinar et al. [114] proposed a novel on-chip trainable
neuron design, where the threshold values of the neurons
can be adjusted individually for specific applications or
during training.

B.

BrainFreeze

Combining digital and analogue concepts in mixedsignal spiking neuromorphic architectures offers the advantages of both types of circuits while mitigating some
of their disadvantages. Tschirhart et al. [117] proposed a
novel mixed-signal neuromorphic design based on superconducting electronics (SCE) – BrainFreeze. This novel
architecture integrates bio-inspired analogue neural circuits with established digital technology to enable scalability and programmability not achievable in other superconducting approaches.
The digital components in BrainFreeze support timemultiplexing, programmable synapse weights and programmable neuron connections, enhancing the effectiveness of the hardware. The architecture’s timemultiplexing capability enables multiple neurons within
the simulated network to sequentially utilize some of the
same physical components, such as the pipelined digital
accumulator, thereby enhancing the hardware’s effective
density. Communication among neurons within BrainFreeze is facilitated through a digital network, akin to
those employed in other large-scale neuromorphic frameworks. This digital network allows the sharing of wires

FIG. 19. A high-level block diagram of the Neuron Core as
part of the BrainFreeze concept.

connecting neuron cores across multiple simulated neurons, eliminating the necessity for dedicated physical
wires to link each pair of neurons and significantly improves scalability. The flexible connectivity offered by the
digital network also allows to implement various neural
network structures by adjusting the routing tables within
the network. By employing this approach, BrainFreeze
leverages recent progress in SCE digital logic and insights
gleaned from large-scale semiconductor neuromorphic architecture.
In its fundamental configuration, the BrainFreeze architecture consists of seven primary elements: control
circuitry, a network interface, a spike buffer, a synapse
weight memory, an accumulator, a digital-to-analog converter, and at least one analog soma circuit. A schematic
representation illustrating the overall architecture is provided in figure 19. The authors refer to one instance of
this architecture as a Neuron Core. This architectural
framework merges the scalability and programmability
features allowed by superconducting digital logic with
the biological suggestivity functionalities enabled by superconducting analog circuits.
Tschirhart et al. provided a comparison of state-of-theart neuromorphic architectures based on CMOS such as
TrueNorth, SpiNNaker, BrainScale, Neurogrid and Loihi
to BrainFreeze in order to demonstrate the potential of
the proposed architecture (see figure 20). In conclusion,
the findings indicate that employing a mixed-signal SCE
neuromorphic approach has the potential to enhance performance in terms of speed, energy efficiency, and model
intricacy compared to the current state of the art.

20

FIG. 20. A comparison of state-of-the-art neuromorphic architectures with the BrainFreeze results. (a) The first comparison examines spike emission speed. (b) The second comparison examines the time and power efficiency of each architecture. (c) The final comparison evaluates the computational
complexity of the neuron models embedded in each architecture. In summary, BrainFreeze shows promising potential to
achieve significant improvements over existing neuromorphic
approaches.

C.

Superconducting nanowire-based and
phase-slip-based realisations

For a large neuromorphic network, the number of SFQ
pulses generated should be high enough to drive a large
fan-out. In this case, the JJ is limited in the number of
SFQ pulses it can generate. Therefore, it may be very
difficult to implement a complete neuromorphic network
based solely on the JJ. Schneider et al. have theoretically reported a fan-out of 1 to 10000 and a fan-in of
100 to 1 [118]. An approximate estimate of the power
dissipated for a 1-to-128 flux-based fan-out circuit for a
given critical current value is reported to be 44 aJ. Additionally, the action potentials in JJ are not sufficiently
strong to be easily detectable. An alternative to JJ could
be a thin superconducting wire, also known as a superconducting nanowire (SNW). The intrinsic non-linearity
exhibited by superconducting nanowires positions them
as promising candidates for the hardware generation of
spiking behavior. When a bias current flowing through a
superconducting nanowire exceeds a threshold known as
the critical current, the superconductivity breaks down
and the nanowire becomes resistive, generating a voltage. The nanowire switches back to the superconducting
state only when the bias current is reduced below the
retrapping current and the resistive part (the “hotspot”)
cools down. Placing the nanowire in parallel with a shunt
resistor initiates electrothermal feedback, resulting in relaxation oscillations [119]. SNWs demonstrate reliable
switching from superconducting to resistive states and
have shown the capability to produce a higher number
of SFQ pulses as output. Toomey et al. [120, 121] have
proposed a nanowire-based neuron circuit that is topologically equivalent to the JJ-based bio-inspired neurons
discussed above.
Quantum phase slip can be described as the exactly

FIG. 21. Illustration of the concept of charge-flux duality:
(a) sketch of a JJ, consisting of an insulating tunnel barrier (yellow) between a superconducting island (blue) and
"ground"; (b) sketch of a QPSJ, consisting of a superconducting nanowire between an insulating island and ‘ground’. The
inserts show the corresponding electrical circuits and currentvoltage characteristics.

dual process to the Josephson effect based on charge-flux
duality (figure 21). In a quantum phase slip junction
(QPSJ), a magnetic flux quantum tunnels across a superconducting nanowire along with Cooper pair transport
and generate a corresponding voltage across the junction
[122, 123]. Unlike Josephson junctions and superconducting nanowires, QPSJs do not require a constant current
bias. However, the “flux-tunelling” together with voltage
spike generation in such systems can be used to implement neuropodic systems on a par with Josephson’s.
Cheng et al. [124] introduced a theoretical QPSJ-based
spiking neuron design in 2018 (figure 22). When an input QPSJ fires, it charges a capacitor, building a potential that eventually exceeds the threshold of the output
QPSJs connected in parallel. A resistor can be added
to maintain the same bias across all QPSJs. This behaviour is consistent with the leaky integrate-and-fire
neuron model. The total “firing” energy for this circuit
design is given by the switching energy of the QPSJ multiplied by the number of QPSJs required for “firing”, and
is estimated to be on the order of 10−21 J, compared to
about 0.33 aJ (per switching event) for a typical JJ-based
neuron.
V.

BIO-INSPIRED ELEMENTS FOR OPTICAL
NEUROMORPHIC SYSTEMS

Another alternative neuromorphic solution is networks
with physical realisation of spikes in the form of electromagnetic field packets. The advantage of such systems as
candidates for hardware implementation of optical neural networks (ONN) is also their speed of information
transmission, which can be carried out at frequencies exceeding 100 GHz (even at room temperature!) [125], as
well as the ability to create distributed networks with
a high degree of connectivity [126]. High bandwidth is
important for practical applications such as those based
on the control of hypersonic aircraft or related to the
processing of radio signals. The first ONN solutions are
based on silicon photonics, which is well compatible with

21
speed of light without additional energy cost. This allows
the dissipation in ONN using VCSEL to be decreased
down to 100 aJ per operation. This looks promising
from the point of view of energy efficiency [134]. However, it should be noted that most optical solutions require the use of coherent sources and detectors, as well
as additional pre- and post-processing, which limits their
scalability and compactness.
A detailed description of the operation of two common
types of OSNN devices, based on phase change materials and semiconductor lasers, is given in the following
subsections.

FIG. 22. A QPSJ-based integrate and fire neuron circuit with
integration capacitor and multiple parallel output QPS junctions [124].

CMOS technology, for example based on Mach-Zender
interferometers [127] and micro-ring resonators [128].
A common feature of optical computing systems is
the ability to perform linear operations efficiently [126,
129], whereas nonlinear signal transformations, including spike-based ones, pose a problem. As a result, these
systems are poorly suited for implementing non-linear
computations directly in the photonic domain. For this
reason, hybrid solutions that combine the strengths of
optical and electronic platforms are of interest. However, hybrid architectures consisting of photonic synapses
and electronic spiking neurons require the use of highspeed photodetectors and analogue-to-digital converters
to translate the results of optical linear computations
back into the digital domain. This is complicated by
high losses and packaging costs due to the need for strict
alignment between lasers and waveguides.
Recently, approaches have been developed to implement photonic spiking neurons and to create fully optical
spiking neural networks (OSNN) using nonlinear optical
elements. Several implementations of leaky integrateand-fire neurons have been proposed based on vertical
cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs)[130, 131], distributed feedback lasers (DFB)[132], phase change materials (PCM) [133]. For example, VCSELs have a wide
range of laser dynamics with distinct modes corresponding to orthogonal and parallel polarisation. The excitation of a sub-ns spike in this photonic neuron is based
on the injection of an external signal and the conversion
of electrical impulses into optical ones, showing all the
typical signs of excitability of integrate-and-fire neuronal
models. At the same time, typical microwave modulation frequencies of 30 − 50 GHz, combined with high
efficiency, provide a sufficiently low power consumption
for nonlinear conversion on the order of 10 f J. By creating a photonic interconnect structure (bandwidth and
latency), the entire structure can, after network training,
perform calculations based on an optical signal at the

A.

Phase change materials for elements in neural
networks

Phase change materials (PCMs) are a special class of
solid state materials that undergo a reversible phase transition from an amorphous to a crystalline state in response to external stimuli. Such perturbations can be
both electrical and laser effects, which stimulate the release of heat in the device and, as a result, a change in
temperature, causing significant changes in the optical
and electrical properties of the materials [135, 136]. One
of the successful materials in photonic computing is the
Ge−Sb−T e alloy, which recently demonstrated nanosecond recording speed using optical pulses [137]. This development has led to the creation of photonic memory
devices [138], switches [139] and non-volatile computers
[140]. In addition, PCM has established itself as a platform for neuromorphic bio-inspired on-chip computing
and has already demonstrated spike-timing dependent
plasticity [141] and control of spiking neurons [142] in
such systems.
In [142], a bipolar integrate-and-fire spiking neuron
is presented for the first time, including an integration
unit (the black dotted block in figure 23a), consisting
of two ring resonators with integrated PCM based on
Ge2 Sb2 T e5 (GST) and "firing" unit (orange dotted block
in figure 23a). The dynamics of a spiking neuron is determined by a change in the GST phase state due to the
absorption of light passing through the waveguide.
This process causes an increase in the temperature of
the material and, consequently, an increase in the amorphisation of the material, that is, the GST state can be
defined as a function of the thickness of the amorphous
layer in the material from the amplitude of the input
pulse. The use of two ring resonators allows the neuron to
receive input signals of both polarities in order to process
both positive and negative weight values of w± synapses,
which is an important component in information processing. In this case, the resulting amplitude of the pulse arriving at the neuron, Σ, is equal to the difference between
the values of the positive and negative inputs. Thus, the
integration of the membrane potential is interconnected
with the amplitude of the resulting pulse arriving at the
neuron, which is represented by the integrating part of

22
neuron based on ring waveguides with GST and a sixnetwork integrated all-optical synapses with integrated
wavelength division multiplexing technology. An illustration of the experimental scheme of a neuromorphic PCM
cell is shown in figure 23b. The work of [133] has already
tested the possibility of unsupervised network learning,
for which a feedback waveguide was added to the circuit
design, through which part of the output neuronal pulse
propagates back through the synaptic elements in the
PCM. This means that the connections with all the inputs that contributed to a particular jump in the output
data are strengthened, and the connections that did not
contribute to the jump are weakened. As a result, the
optical SNN developed was able to detect the simplest
patterns.

B.
FIG. 23. (a) Schematic of a bipolar integrate-and-fire neuron based on GST ring resonator devices, where the right
part in the black frame is responsible for integration part,
and the right part in an orange dotted frame corresponds to
the “firing” part. (b) Schematic representation of three PCM
neurons, each connected to four ring resonators (input) with
different wavelengths (blue arrows). The total signal then enters the PCM cells (large rings on the right side of the figure),
where the spike is generated [133].

the circuit in figure 23а in a black dotted frame. As soon
as GST reaches complete amorphisation, the membrane
potential crosses its threshold. The “firing” action of the
neuron is implemented by an additional photonic circuit
(see the part highlighted by the orange dotted frame in
figure 23a). This circuit consists of a photonic amplifier,
a circulator and a rectangular waveguide with a GST element in a crystalline state with low pulse transmission.
Based on the developed bipolar neuron circuit, the possibility of recording information at subnanosecond times
is shown [137, 142]. In addition, plasticity in weighing
operations of synapses [143, 144] were demonstrated on
these PCM systems. The simplest prototype of an optical SNN was proposed, which demonstrated the scaling
of individual synapses into a large-scale synaptic matrix
capable of performing parallelised point computations
through wavelength division multiplexing [145], modulating the resonant wavelength by changing the size of
the waveguides. This allowed higher recording densities
to be achieved and circumvented some of the problems
associated with designing ring resonators whose size is
comparable to the operating wavelength range. Further,
in the work [146], a framework was proposed to demonstrate the operation of the proposed photonic SNN platform based on ring resonators with GST in solving image
classification problems.
In 2019, the first experimental implementation of the
integrated photonic SNN [133] was presented, consisting
of three presynaptic neurons, one output (postsynaptic)

Spiking networks with semiconductor lasers

Semiconductor lasers are solid-state devices whose operation is based on the properties of a semiconductor material. The power, directivity and compactness of solidstate lasers make them indispensable for high-intensity
tasks, while the adaptability and efficiency of semiconductor lasers lend themselves to applications requiring
precision and stability. Fairly recently, another promising application of semiconductor lasers has appeared –
neuromorphic computing. It has already been possible
to observe the manifestation of bio-inspired properties of
such systems, such as excitability [147, 148] and demonstration of nonlinear dynamics [149, 150], which became
promising first steps towards the implementation and
study of optical spiking neurons based on semiconductor lasers.
Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers (VCSEL)
[130, 131] and Distributed Feedback Semiconductor
Lasers (DFB-SL) [132] are currently the main types of
devices for creating and studying optical spiking neurons. The photonic elements under consideration consists of three parts: a photodetector acting as an opticalelectrical converter, a receiver - a pulse converter of the
micrometer range that generates pulses in response to
incoming disturbances at the input, and VCSEL with a
wavelength of 1550 nm, acting as a converter of an electrical signal into an optical one. A typical scheme for
implementing spiking neuron based on VCSEL is shown
in figure 24 (a). Obtaining controlled optical spikes when
exposed to exciting signals is based on the effects of polarisation switching, as well as synchronisation of phase
and amplitude modulated injection locking [151].
Another way of implementing the spiking optical neuron [153] in laser systems is to use a resonant tunneling
diode: a semiconductor heterostructure with a doublebarrier quantum well [154]. Due to the N-shaped IV characteristic of the diode and the effect of resonant
quantum tunneling, such devices have rich nonlinear dynamics. The amplitude of optical pulses in synaptic connections can be controlled by adjusting the VCSEL bias

23

FIG. 24. (a) Schematic diagram showing the basic working
principle of the experimentally investigated weighting of subns optical spikes produced by a VCSEL-neuron. (b) An experimental scheme of a photonic spiking neuron based on the
use of the photodetector-resonant tunneling diode – VCSEL
scheme, see more details in the work [152], where TL – tunable laser, ISO – optical isolator, PC – polarization controller,
MZM – Mach–Zehnder modulator, PM – optical power meter,
CIRC – optical circulator, OSA – optical spectrum analyzer,
PD – photodetector, and RT OSC – real-time oscilloscope
.

current. In the paper [152], an artificial optoelectronic
neuron based on an InGaAs resonant tunnel diode connected to a VCSEL has been proposed and experimentally implemented (see figure 24 (b)), which allows the
presynaptic weight of the emitted optical pulses to be
fully tuned at high speed. The operation of the optical
neuron is based on coherent injection locking of the VCSEL with a signal from an external tunable laser source
(TL). The TL signal is passed through an optical isolator
(ISO) to provide unidirectional communication between
the lasers, and the TL light intensity is modulated using a Mach–Zehnder modulator (MZM). The polarization of the modulated signal is consistent with the orthogonally polarized VCSEL mode before it is fed into
the device through an optical circulator (CIRC). Another
branch of this connector is used to register power of the
VCSEL-neuron using the photodetector (PD) and the
real-time oscilloscope (RT OSC) from the power meter
(PM). The wavelength TL corresponds to a peak in the
laser spectrum. Switching between the states (threshold
and steady) is carried out by adjusting the input power.
The information is encoded in the signal intensity in such
a way that the “stronger” stimuli correspond to a greater
decrease in injection power.
The threshold characteristics and refractory period of
neurons based on VCSELs [155–158] have already been
studied. These properties naturally determine the maximum pulse response frequency and are key properties

for spike processing using rate coding, photonic polarisation dynamics and excitability of neurons [159], as
well as controlled distribution spike pulses [160, 161].
Furthermore, the simplest integrated photonic accelerator processor based on VCSELs has been experimentally
proposed and the simplest implementation of the XOR
[162] classification problem has been demonstrated. It is
shown that the spike laser neuron performs coincidence
detection with nanosecond time resolution with a refractive period of about 0.1 ns. In addition, [163] proposed a
physical model for pattern recognition based on photonic
STDP, which is also based on VCSELs. However, the
neurons on VCSELs require a continuous power supply to
maintain the behaviour of the neurons, so the advantages
of energy efficiency in such systems are negated. With
regard to DFB lasers, schemes have also been proposed
for the implementation of passive micro-ring optical spiking neurons [164], where neuromorphic information processing is performed, including image recognition based
on STDP. Note that an important difference from VCSEL in implementing STDR on DFB-SL is the absence
of wavelength conversion and the use of optical filters
[163, 165].
It should be noted that spiking of optical neurons
on other types of semiconductor lasers is currently being proposed. For example, ring lasers have achieved
multiple spikes with a single perturbation [166], excitation responses based on semiconductor lasers on quantum
dots [167, 168] have been successfully modelled, threshold properties of optically injected microdisk lasers [169]
have been studied, and an integrated graphene-excited
laser has been shown to exhibit dynamics on the order
of picosecond timescales [170]. However, these types of
lasers are in the early stages of research for SNN compared to VCSEL and DFB-SL.

VI.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The opportunities for neuromorphic computing technology are immense, ranging from classical tasks such as
pattern recognition and video stream analysis to central
nervous system modelling and brain-computer interfaces.
Challenges for the SNN include: neuromorphic locomotion control, neurorobotics, gait control, environmental
perception, adaptation; computational modelling of the
brain in the study of biological nervous systems (Human
Brain Project); dynamic recognition; prosthetics (visual
and auditory implants, treatment of Parkinson’s, dystonia, schizophrenia, etc.), etc.
For the time being, not many laboratories in the world
are involved in these projects and tasks, as the main focus
is now on the development of narrowly focused software
models that solve a strictly defined problem. There is
not yet a demand from large international companies or
large private consumer sectors for the creation of versatile
neural network models, but this moment is approaching:
the problem of designing and training deep neural net-

24
works of large dimensionality is becoming more and more
obvious. Nowadays, almost all neural network models
are implemented in one way or another on the basis of
NVIDIA’s video chips, the annual production of which is
very limited, and there are even certain quotas for bulk
purchases. The energy required to train such networks is
also a significant problem. At the same time, there is no
guarantee that the neural network model is designed correctly and that the training is carried out as required: it
may turn out that the accuracy of the neural network is
not high enough, or there may be an overtraining effect.
The advantages of the semiconductor element base for
hardware implementation of bio-inspired neural networks
are significant developments in the field of information input/output devices, digital-to-analogue and analogue-todigital converters. Unfortunately, one of the main problems when trying to implement hardware parallelism of
large networks is the implementation of synaptic connections. In two-dimensional parallel hardware, physical wiring only allows connections between adjacent neurons , whereas biological neurons are distributed in threedimensional space and have many (thousands) connections between populations.
Memristive technologies can be instrumental in the
creation of large-scale networks with a large number of
synaptic connections [171]. The memristive crossbars,
which are used as a kind of synaptic grid with both STDP
and STDD (Spike Timing Dependent Depression). The
neurons themselves are mostly implemented using transistors. Attempts are being made to create a fully memristive neural network, but it is still not possible to realise
without more conventional semiconductor devices.
The field of superconductivity has its own distinct successes (high performance and energy efficiency) and problems (low integration density). Special attention should
be paid to hybrid interdisciplinary approaches [172–175]:
for signal transmission, for light pulses transmitted from
neuron to neuron via optical waveguides on a chip, for information processing and storage, and for superconducting circuits, including single-photon detectors and superconducting digital logic cells. Superconducting technologies make it possible to reduce the energy stored in pulses
by the electromagnetic field so that a signal containing
only a few photons can be used. To increase the compactness and efficiency of the interaction with electromagnetic
radiation, current concentrating heterostructures (variable thickness bridges or Diem bridges) and multilayer
thin film heterostructures can be used instead of traditional superconductor-insulator-superconductor Joseph-

son junctions. Finally, superconducting implementations
are interesting because they allow close integration with
superconducting quantum bits [176]. This offers the hope
of being able to experimentally test hypotheses about the
role of quantum effects in the functioning of consciousness.
In the pursuit of bio-inspiration, performance, energy
efficiency, scalability and compactness, one should not
fall into the extremes of the capabilities of a single element base – it is likely that some elements of a neural
network are much more convenient and efficient to implement in a different way. In this review we have tried to
show not only that the field of spiking neural networks
with bio-inspired properties is actively developing, but
that it is developing in different directions, like an octopus with its tentacles finding the right solution, the direction of development. In our view, all the areas discussed
in this article have their own strengths and weaknesses.
At the moment, however, it is difficult to say which of
them will “take off”. This is why hybrid approaches are
so popular at the moment, taking the advantages of their
components and compensating for their mutual disadvantages. In addition to hardware implementations and
software SNNs, biological neural networks based on biological organoids and reservoir computing [177–179] are
on the way to creating a biocomputer [180], but we have
left this area outside the scope of this review.

[1] J. Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green,
A. Pritzel, O. Ronneberger, L. Willmore, A. J. Ballard, J. Bambrick, et al., Accurate structure prediction
of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3, Nature ,
1 (2024).
[2] J. J. Hopfield, Neural networks and physical systems

with emergent collective computational abilities, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 79(8),
2554 (1982).
[3] A. Prieto, B. Prieto, E. M. Ortigosa, E. Ros, F. Pelayo,
J. Ortega, and I. Rojas, Neural networks: An overview
of early research, current frameworks and new chal-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The concept of developing spiking neural networks was
carried out with the support of the Grant of the Russian
Science Foundation No. 22-72-10075. We are grateful to
the the Foundation for the Advancement of Theoretical
Physics and Mathematics “BASIS” (A.S. grant 22-1-316-1; M.B. grant 22-1-3-41-1; A.M. grant 23-2-1-16-1).
A.S. contributed to the Introduction, the second section
"CMOS-based bio-inspired neuromorphic circuits", Discussion and general edition. M.B. contributed to the second section on memristive systems, as well as on optical
neuromorphic systems. A.M. contributed to the fourth
section "Superconductor-based bio-inspired elements of
neural networks". The analysis of the possibilities of hybrid approaches was supported by the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (Agreement No. 075-15-2024-632).

25
lenges, Neurocomputing 214, 242 (2016).
[4] A. Taherkhani, A. Belatreche, Y. Li, G. Cosma, L. P.
Maguire, and T. M. McGinnity, A review of learning in
biologically plausible spiking neural networks, Neural
Networks 122, 253 (2020).
[5] H. Markram, The blue brain project, Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 7, 153 (2006).
[6] P. Van Der Smagt, M. A. Arbib, and G. Metta, Neurorobotics: From vision to action, Springer Handbook of
Robotics , 2069 (2016).
[7] M. Iosa, G. Morone, A. Cherubini, and S. Paolucci,
The three laws of neurorobotics: a review on what neurorehabilitation robots should do for patients and clinicians, Journal of medical and biological engineering 36,
1 (2016).
[8] E. Falotico, L. Vannucci, A. Ambrosano, U. Albanese,
S. Ulbrich, J. C. Vasquez Tieck, G. Hinkel, J. Kaiser,
I. Peric, O. Denninger, et al., Connecting artificial
brains to robots in a comprehensive simulation framework: the neurorobotics platform, Frontiers in neurorobotics 11, 2 (2017).
[9] S. Raspopovic, Neurorobotics for neurorehabilitation,
Science 373, 634 (2021).
[10] N. K. Kasabov, Neucube: A spiking neural network
architecture for mapping, learning and understanding
of spatio-temporal brain data, Neural Networks 52, 62
(2014).
[11] K. Yamazaki, V.-K. Vo-Ho, D. Bulsara, and N. Le, Spiking neural networks and their applications: A review,
Brain Sciences 12, 863 (2022).
[12] Q. Liang, Y. Zeng, and B. Xu, Temporal-sequential
learning with a brain-inspired spiking neural network
and its application to musical memory, Frontiers in
Computational Neuroscience 14, 51 (2020).
[13] B. He, H. Yuan, J. Meng, and S. Gao, Brain–computer
interfaces, Neural engineering , 131 (2020).
[14] X. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Chen, and S. Gao, Interface, interaction, and intelligence in generalized brain–computer
interfaces, Trends in cognitive sciences 25, 671 (2021).
[15] D. Yadav, S. Yadav, and K. Veer, A comprehensive assessment of brain computer interfaces: Recent trends
and challenges, Journal of Neuroscience Methods 346,
108918 (2020).
[16] S. N. Flesher, J. E. Downey, J. M. Weiss, C. L. Hughes,
A. J. Herrera, E. C. Tyler-Kabara, M. L. Boninger, J. L.
Collinger, and R. A. Gaunt, A brain-computer interface
that evokes tactile sensations improves robotic arm control, Science 372, 831 (2021).
[17] A. Bonci, S. Fiori, H. Higashi, T. Tanaka, and F. Verdini, An introductory tutorial on brain–computer interfaces and their applications, Electronics 10, 560 (2021).
[18] N. Zheng and P. Mazumder, Operational Principles
and Learning in Spiking Neural Networks (Wiley-IEEE
Press, 2020).
[19] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve, The Journal of physiology
117, 500 (1952).
[20] K. Malcom and J. Casco-Rodriguez, A comprehensive review of spiking neural networks:
Interpretation,
optimization,
efficiency,
and
best practices, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10780
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.10780 (2023).
[21] M. Häusser, The hodgkin-huxley theory of the action

potential, Nature neuroscience 3, 1165 (2000).
[22] S. Thanapitak, Bionics Chemical Synapse, Ph.D. thesis
(2012).
[23] E. M. Izhikevich, Simple model of spiking neurons, IEEE Transactions on neural networks 14,
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2003.820440 (2003).
[24] E. Izhikevich, Dynamical systems in neuroscience:
The geometry of excitability and
bursting,
Mathematics,
Computer
Science
http://dx.doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/2526.001.0001
(2006).
[25] Y. Wu, L. Deng, G. Li, J. Zhu, and L. Shi,
Spatio-temporal backpropagation for training highperformance spiking neural networks, Frontiers in neuroscience 12, 331 (2018).
[26] J. K. Eshraghian, M. Ward, E. O. Neftci, X. Wang,
G. Lenz, G. Dwivedi, M. Bennamoun, D. S. Jeong,
and W. D. Lu, Training spiking neural networks using lessons from deep learning, Proceedings of the IEEE
10.1109/jproc.2023.3308088 (2023).
[27] J. A. Pérez-Carrasco, B. Zhao, C. Serrano, B. Acha,
T. Serrano-Gotarredona, S. Chen, and B. LinaresBarranco, Mapping from frame-driven to frame-free
event-driven vision systems by low-rate rate coding and
coincidence processing–application to feedforward convnets, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 35, 2706 (2013).
[28] B. Yin, F. Corradi, and S. M. Bohté, Accurate online
training of dynamical spiking neural networks through
forward propagation through time, Nature Machine Intelligence , 1 (2023).
[29] K. Irie, A. Gopalakrishnan, and J. Schmidhuber,
Exploring the promise and limits of real-time recurrent learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19044
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.19044 (2023).
[30] M. Reljan-Delaney and J. Wall, Solving the linearly inseparable xor problem with spiking neural networks, in
2017 Computing Conference (IEEE, 2017) pp. 701–705.
[31] G. Indiveri, B. Linares-Barranco, T. J. Hamilton, A. v.
Schaik, R. Etienne-Cummings, T. Delbruck, S.-C. Liu,
P. Dudek, P. Häfliger, S. Renaud, et al., Neuromorphic
silicon neuron circuits, Frontiers in neuroscience 5, 73
(2011).
[32] P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, R. Alvarez-Icaza, A. S. Cassidy, J. Sawada, F. Akopyan, B. L. Jackson, N. Imam,
C. Guo, Y. Nakamura, et al., A million spiking-neuron
integrated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface, Science 345, 668 (2014).
[33] F. Akopyan, J. Sawada, A. Cassidy, R. Alvarez-Icaza,
J. Arthur, P. Merolla, N. Imam, Y. Nakamura, P. Datta,
G.-J. Nam, et al., Truenorth: Design and tool flow of
a 65 mw 1 million neuron programmable neurosynaptic
chip, IEEE transactions on computer-aided design of
integrated circuits and systems 34, 1537 (2015).
[34] B. V. Benjamin, P. Gao, E. McQuinn, S. Choudhary,
A. R. Chandrasekaran, J.-M. Bussat, R. Alvarez-Icaza,
J. V. Arthur, P. A. Merolla, and K. Boahen, Neurogrid:
A mixed-analog-digital multichip system for large-scale
neural simulations, Proceedings of the IEEE 102, 699
(2014).
[35] L. A. Camuñas-Mesa, B. Linares-Barranco, and
T. Serrano-Gotarredona, Neuromorphic spiking neural
networks and their memristor-cmos hardware implementations, Materials 12, 2745 (2019).

26
[36] K. M. Hynna and K. Boahen, Thermodynamically
equivalent silicon models of voltage-dependent ion channels, Neural computation 19, 327 (2007).
[37] Y.-S. Park, S. Woo, D. Lim, K. Cho, and S. Kim,
Integrate-and-fire neuron circuit without external bias
voltages, Frontiers in neuroscience 15, 644604 (2021).
[38] J. H. Wijekoon and P. Dudek, Compact silicon neuron circuit with spiking and bursting behaviour, Neural
Networks 21, 524 (2008).
[39] S. B. Furber, D. R. Lester, L. A. Plana, J. D. Garside,
E. Painkras, S. Temple, and A. D. Brown, Overview of
the spinnaker system architecture, IEEE transactions
on computers 62, 2454 (2012).
[40] J. Sawada, F. Akopyan, A. S. Cassidy, B. Taba, M. V.
Debole, P. Datta, R. Alvarez-Icaza, A. Amir, J. V.
Arthur, A. Andreopoulos, et al., Truenorth ecosystem
for brain-inspired computing: scalable systems, software, and applications, in SC’16: Proceedings of the
International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (IEEE, 2016)
pp. 130–141.
[41] E. Stromatias, D. Neil, F. Galluppi, M. Pfeiffer, S.-C.
Liu, and S. Furber, Scalable energy-efficient, low-latency
implementations of trained spiking deep belief networks
on spinnaker, in 2015 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN) (IEEE, 2015) pp. 1–8.
[42] B. D. Learning, A performance and power analysis,
NVidia Whitepaper, Nov (2015).
[43] C. Mayr, S. Hoeppner, and S. Furber, Spinnaker 2: A
10 million core processor system for brain simulation
and machine learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02385
10.3233/978-1-61499-949-2-277 (2019).
[44] E. Painkras, L. A. Plana, J. Garside, S. Temple,
F. Galluppi, C. Patterson, D. R. Lester, A. D. Brown,
and S. B. Furber, Spinnaker: A 1-w 18-core system-onchip for massively-parallel neural network simulation,
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 48, 1943 (2013).
[45] E. Stromatias, F. Galluppi, C. Patterson, and S. Furber,
Power analysis of large-scale, real-time neural networks
on spinnaker, in The 2013 international joint conference
on neural networks (IJCNN) (IEEE, 2013) pp. 1–8.
[46] S. Höppner, Y. Yan, A. Dixius, S. Scholze, J. Partzsch,
M. Stolba, F. Kelber, B. Vogginger, F. Neumärker,
G. Ellguth, et al., The spinnaker 2 processing
element architecture for hybrid digital neuromorphic computing, arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08392
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.08392 (2021).
[47] P. Merolla, J. Arthur, R. Alvarez, J.-M. Bussat, and
K. Boahen, A multicast tree router for multichip neuromorphic systems, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems I: Regular Papers 61, 820 (2013).
[48] B. V. Benjamin, N. A. Steinmetz, N. N. Oza, J. J.
Aguayo, and K. Boahen, Neurogrid simulates cortical
cell-types, active dendrites, and top-down attention,
Neuromorphic Computing and Engineering 1, 013001
(2021).
[49] J. C. Knight and T. Nowotny, Larger gpu-accelerated
brain simulations with procedural connectivity, Nature
Computational Science 1, 136 (2021).
[50] D. S. Modha, F. Akopyan, A. Andreopoulos, R. Appuswamy, J. V. Arthur, A. S. Cassidy, P. Datta, M. V.
DeBole, S. K. Esser, C. O. Otero, et al., Neural inference at the frontier of energy, space, and time, Science
382, 329 (2023).

[51] M. Davies, N. Srinivasa, T.-H. Lin, G. Chinya, Y. Cao,
S. H. Choday, G. Dimou, P. Joshi, N. Imam, S. Jain,
et al., Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with
on-chip learning, Ieee Micro 38, 82 (2018).
[52] C.-K. Lin, A. Wild, G. N. Chinya, Y. Cao, M. Davies,
D. M. Lavery, and H. Wang, Programming spiking neural networks on intel’s loihi, Computer 51, 52 (2018).
[53] M. Davies et al., Taking neuromorphic computing to the
next level with loihi2, Intel Labs’ Loihi 2, 1 (2021).
[54] S. B. Shrestha, J. Timcheck, P. Frady, L. CamposMacias, and M. Davies, Efficient video and audio processing with loihi 2, in ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE, 2024) pp. 13481–13485.
[55] G. Parpart, S. Risbud, G. Kenyon, and Y. Watkins,
Implementing and benchmarking the locally competitive algorithm on the loihi 2 neuromorphic processor,
in Proceedings of the 2023 International Conference on
Neuromorphic Systems (2023) pp. 1–6.
[56] R. B. Uludağ, S. Çağdaş, Y. S. İşler, N. S.
Şengör, and I. Akturk, Bio-realistic neural network implementation on loihi 2 with izhikevich neurons, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11844
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.11844 (2023).
[57] L. Chua, Memristor-the missing circuit element, IEEE
Transactions on Circuit Theory 18, 507 (1971).
[58] D. B. Strukov, G. S. Snider, D. R. Stewart, and R. S.
Williams, The missing memristor found, Nature 453, 80
(2008).
[59] Y. Li, Z. Wang, R. Midya, Q. Xia, and J. J. Yang,
Review of memristor devices in neuromorphic computing: materials sciences and device challenges, Journal of
Physics D Applied Physics 51, 503002 (2018).
[60] E. Victor, Memristive devices for neuromorphic applications: Comparative analysis, BioNanoScience 10, 834
(2020).
[61] S. H. Lee, X. Zhu, and W. D. Lu, Nanoscale resistive
switching devices for memory and computing applications, Nano Res. 13, 1228–1243 (2020).
[62] A. N. Mikhaylov, E. G. Gryaznov, M. N. Koryazhkina, I. A. Bordanov, S. A. Shchanikov, O. A. Telminov, and V. B. Kazantsev, Neuromorphic computing
based on cmos-integrated memristive arrays: Current
state and perspectives, Supercomputing Frontiers and
Innovations 10, 77–103 (2023).
[63] Z. Wang, S. Joshi, S. Savel’Ev, W. Song, R. Midya,
Y. Li, M. Rao, P. Yan, S. Asapu, Y. Zhuo, et al.,
Fully memristive neural networks for pattern classification with unsupervised learning, Nature Electronics
1, 137 (2018).
[64] D. B. Strukov and R. S. Williams, Four-dimensional
address topology for circuits with stacked multilayer crossbar arrays, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, 20155 (2009),
https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.0906949106.
[65] J. Sung Hyun, C. Ting, E. Idongesit, B. Bhavitavya B.,
M. Pinaki, and L. Wei, Nanoscale memristor device as
synapse in neuromorphic systems, Nano Lett. 10, 1297
(2010).
[66] K. K. Likharev, Crossnets: Neuromorphic hybrid
cmos/nanoelectronic networks, Science of Advanced
Materials 3, 322 (2011).
[67] M. Prezioso, F. Merrikh-Bayat, B. D. Hoskins, G. C.

27
Adam, K. K. Likharev, and D. B. Strukov, Training and
operation of an integrated neuromorphic network based
on metal-oxide memristors, Nature 521, 61 (2015).
[68] M. Prezioso, F. Merrikh Bayat, B. Hoskins, K. Likharev,
and D. Strukov, Self-adaptive spike-time-dependent
plasticity of metal-oxide memristors, Scientific reports
6, 21331 (2016).
[69] G. Papandroulidakis, I. Vourkas, A. Abusleme, G. C.
Sirakoulis, and A. Rubio, Crossbar-based memristive
logic-in-memory architecture, IEEE Transactions on
Nanotechnology 16, 491 (2017).
[70] X. Zhang, A. Huang, Q. Hu, Z. Xiao, and P. K.
Chu, Neuromorphic computing with memristor crossbar, physica status solidi (a) 215, 1700875 (2018).
[71] Q. Xia and J. J. Yang, Memristive crossbar arrays
for brain-inspired computing, Nature materials 18, 309
(2019).
[72] I. Tzouvadaki, P. Gkoupidenis, S. Vassanelli, S. Wang,
and T. Prodromakis, Interfacing biology and electronics with memristive materials, Advanced Materials 35,
2210035 (2023).
[73] S. La Barbera, D. Vuillaume, and F. Alibart, Filamentary switching: synaptic plasticity through device
volatility, ACS nano 9, 941 (2015).
[74] X. Zhang, W. Wang, Q. Liu, X. Zhao, J. Wei, R. Cao,
Z. Yao, X. Zhu, F. Zhang, H. Lv, et al., An artificial
neuron based on a threshold switching memristor, IEEE
Electron Device Letters 39, 308 (2017).
[75] Q. Duan, Z. Jing, X. Zou, Y. Wang, K. Yang, T. Zhang,
S. Wu, R. Huang, and Y. Yang, Spiking neurons
with spatiotemporal dynamics and gain modulation for
monolithically integrated memristive neural networks,
Nature communications 11, 3399 (2020).
[76] Y. V. Pershin and V. A. Slipko, Dynamical attractors
of memristors and their networks, Europhysics Letters
125, 20002 (2019).
[77] R. Carboni and D. Ielmini, Stochastic memory devices
for security and computing, Adv. Electron. Mater. 5, 1
(2019).
[78] V. A. Makarov, S. A. Lobov, S. Shchanikov,
A. Mikhaylov, and V. B. Kazantsev, Toward reflective spiking neural networks exploiting memristive devices, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 16,
10.3389/fncom.2022.859874 (2022).
[79] M. Prezioso, M. Mahmoodi, F. Bayat, H. Nili, H. Kim,
A. Vincent, and D. Strukov, Spike-timing-dependent
plasticity learning of coincidence detection with passively integrated memristive circuits, Nat Commun. 9,
10.1038/s41467-018-07757-y (2018).
[80] V. A. Demin, D. V. Nekhaev, I. A. Surazhevsky, K. E.
Nikiruy, A. V. Emelyanov, and S. N. Nikolaev, Necessary conditions for stdp-based pattern recognition learning in a memristive spiking neural network, Neural
Netw. 134, 64 (2021).
[81] A. Amirsoleimani, F. Alibart, V. Yon, M. R.
Xu, J.and Pazhouhandeh, S. Ecoffey, Y. Beilliard,
R. Genov, and D. A. Drouin, In-memory vectormatrix multiplication in monolithic complementary
metal–oxide–semiconductor-memristor integrated circuits: design choices, challenges, and perspectives., Adv.
Intell. Syst. 2, 10.1002/aisy.202000115 (2020).
[82] S. Saı̈ghi, C. G. Mayr, T. Serrano-Gotarredona,
H. Schmidt, G. Lecerf, J. Tomas, J. Grollier, S. Boyn,
A. F. Vincent, D. Querlioz, et al., Plasticity in mem-

ristive devices for spiking neural networks, Frontiers in
neuroscience 9, 123457 (2015).
[83] W. R. Softky and C. Koch, The highly irregular firing of
cortical cells is inconsistent with temporal integration of
random epsps, Journal of neuroscience 13, 334 (1993).
[84] Z. F. Mainen and T. J. Sejnowski, Reliability of spike
timing in neocortical neurons, Science 268, 1503 (1995).
[85] C. F. Stevens and A. M. Zador, Input synchrony and the
irregular firing of cortical neurons, Nature neuroscience
1, 210 (1998).
[86] K. Ishida, I. Byun, I. Nagaoka, K. Fukumitsu,
M. Tanaka, S. Kawakami, T. Tanimoto, T. Ono, J. Kim,
and K. Inoue, Superconductor computing for neural networks, Ieee Micro 41, 19 (2021).
[87] V. K. Semenov, E. B. Golden, and S. K. Tolpygo, A new
family of biosfq logic/memory cells, IEEE Transactions
on Applied Superconductivity 32, 1 (2021).
[88] V. K. Semenov, E. B. Golden, and S. K. Tolpygo, Biosfq
circuit family for neuromorphic computing: Bridging
digital and analog domains of superconductor technologies, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity
10.1109/tasc.2023.3252495 (2023).
[89] Q. P. Herr, A. Y. Herr, O. T. Oberg, and A. G.
Ioannedis, Ultra-low-power superconductor logic, Ieee
Access 6, 5128 (2011).
[90] O. A. Mukhanov, Energy-efficient single flux quantum technology, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond 21, 760
(2011).
[91] M. Tanaka, M. Ito, A. Kitayama, T. Kouketsu, and
A. Fujimaki, 18-ghz, 4.0-aj/bit operation of ultralow-energy rapid single-flux-quantum shift registers, J.
Appl. Phys. 51, 053102 (2012).
[92] I. I. Soloviev, N. V. Klenov, S. V. Bakurskiy, M. Y.
Kupriyanov, A. L. Gudkov, and A. S. Sidorenko, Beyond moore’s technologies: operation principles of a superconductor alternative, Beilstein journal of nanotechnology 8, 2689 (2017).
[93] V. K. Semenov, Y. A. Polyakov, and S. K. Tolpygo, Acbiased shift registers as fabrication process benchmark
circuits and flux trapping diagnostic tool, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 27, 1 (2017).
[94] O. A. Mukhanov, Applied superconductivity: Handbook on devices and applications (Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH & Co. KGaA: Weinheim, Germany, 2015) Chap.
Superconductor Digital Electronics, pp. 1–28.
[95] B. D. Josephson, Possible new effects in superconductive
tunnelling, Physics letters 1, 251 (1962).
[96] P. W. Anderson and J. M. Rowell, Probable observation of the josephson superconducting tunneling effect,
Physical Review Letters 10, 230 (1963).
[97] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, D. E. Oates, R. Rastogi,
S. Zarr, A. L. Day, T. J. Weir, A. Wynn, and L. M.
Johnson, Superconductor electronics fabrication process
with monx kinetic inductors and self-shunted josephson
junctions, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 28, 1100212
(2018).
[98] S. K. Tolpygo, E. B. Golden, T. J. Weir, and
V. Bolkhovsky, Inductance of superconductor integrated
circuit features with sizes down to 120 nm, Superconductor Science and Technology 34, 085005 (2021).
[99] S. K. Tolpygo, R. Rastogi, T. Weir, E. B. Golden, and
V. Bolkhovsky, Development of self-shunted josephson
junctions for a ten-superconductor-layer fabrication process: Nb/nbnx/nb junctions, IEEE Transactions on Ap-

28
plied Superconductivity 34, 1 (2024).
[100] M. A. Castellanos-Beltran, D. I. Olaya, A. J. Sirois,
P. D. Dresselhaus, S. P. Benz, and P. F. Hopkins,
Stacked josephson junctions as inductors for single flux
quantum circuits, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 29, 1 (2019).
[101] D. Roditchev, C. Brun, L. Serrier-Garcia, J. C. Cuevas,
V. H. L. Bessa, M. V. Milošević, F. Debontridder,
V. Stolyarov, and T. Cren, Direct observation of josephson vortex cores, Nature Physics 11, 332 (2015).
[102] V. S. Stolyarov, T. Cren, C. Brun, I. A. Golovchanskiy, O. V. Skryabina, D. I. Kasatonov, M. M. Khapaev,
M. Y. Kupriyanov, A. A. Golubov, and D. Roditchev,
Expansion of a superconducting vortex core into a diffusive metal, Nature communications 9, 1 (2018).
[103] S. Y. Grebenchuk, R. A. Hovhannisyan, V. V. Dremov,
A. G. Shishkin, V. I. Chichkov, A. A. Golubov,
D. Roditchev, V. M. Krasnov, and V. S. Stolyarov, Observation of interacting josephson vortex chains by magnetic force microscopy, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 023105
(2020).
[104] P. Crotty, D. Schult, and K. Segall, Josephson junction
simulation of neurons, Physical Review E 82, 011914
(2010).
[105] O. V. Skryabina, A. E. Schegolev, N. V. Klenov, S. V.
Bakurskiy, A. G. Shishkin, S. V. Sotnichuk, K. S. Napolskii, I. A. Nazhestkin, I. I. Soloviev, M. Y. Kupriyanov,
et al., Superconducting bio-inspired au-nanowire-based
neurons, Nanomaterials 12, 1671 (2022).
[106] A. E. Schegolev, N. V. Klenov, G. I. Gubochkin, M. Y.
Kupriyanov, and I. I. Soloviev, Bio-inspired design of
superconducting spiking neuron and synapse, Nanomaterials 13, 2101 (2023).
[107] T. Karimov, V. Ostrovskii, V. Rybin, O. Druzhina,
G. Kolev, and D. Butusov, Magnetic flux sensor based
on spiking neurons with josephson junctions, Sensors
24, 2367 (2024).
[108] F. Feldhoff and H. Toepfer, Niobium neuron: Rsfq based
bio-inspired circuit, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 31, 1 (2021).
[109] Y. Harada and E. Goto, Artificial neural network circuits with josephson devices, IEEE transactions on magnetics 27, 2863 (1991).
[110] Y. Yamanashi, K. Umeda, and N. Yoshikawa, Pseudo
sigmoid function generator for a superconductive neural
network, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 23, 1701004 (2012).
[111] F. Feldhoff and H. Toepfer, Short-and long-term state
switching in the superconducting niobium neuron plasticity, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity
10.1109/tasc.2024.3355876 (2024).
[112] A. E. Schegolev, N. V. Klenov, S. V. Bakurskiy, I. I.
Soloviev, M. Y. Kupriyanov, M. V. Tereshonok, and
A. S. Sidorenko, Tunable superconducting neurons for
networks based on radial basis functions, Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 13, 444 (2022).
[113] M. A. Karamuftuoglu, B. Z. Ucpinar, A. Fayyazi,
S.
Razmkhah,
M.
Kamal,
and
M.
Pedram,
Scalable
superconductor
neuron
with
ternary
synaptic
connections
for
ultra-fast
snn hardware, arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16384
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.16384 (2024).
[114] B. Z. Ucpinar, M. A. Karamuftuoglu, S. Razmkhah, and
M. Pedram, An on-chip trainable neuron circuit for sfq-

based spiking neural networks, IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity 10.1109/tasc.2024.3359164
(2024).
[115] M. L. Schneider, C. A. Donnelly, and S. E.
Russek, Tutorial:
High-speed low-power neuromorphic systems based on magnetic Josephson junctions, Journal of Applied Physics 124,
161102 (2018), https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/articlepdf/doi/10.1063/1.5042425/15217796/161102_1_online.pdf.
[116] F. Wu, H. Meng, and J. Ma, Reproduced neuron-like
excitability and bursting synchronization of memristive
josephson junctions loaded inductor, Neural Networks
169, 607 (2024).
[117] P. Tschirhart and K. Segall, Brainfreeze: Expanding the
capabilities of neuromorphic systems using mixed-signal
superconducting electronics, Frontiers in Neuroscience
15, 10.3389/fnins.2021.750748 (2021).
[118] M. L. Schneider and K. Segall, Fan-out and
fan-in properties of superconducting neuromorphic circuits, Journal of Applied Physics 128,
214903 (2020), https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/articlepdf/doi/10.1063/5.0025168/15256290/214903_1_online.pdf.
[119] E. Toomey, Q.-Y. Zhao, A. N. McCaughan, and K. K.
Berggren, Frequency pulling and mixing of relaxation
oscillations in superconducting nanowires, Physical Review Applied 9, 064021 (2018).
[120] E. Toomey, K. Segall, and K. K. Berggren, Design of a
power efficient artificial neuron using superconducting
nanowires, Frontiers in neuroscience 13, 481146 (2019).
[121] E. Toomey, K. Segall, M. Castellani, M. Colangelo, N. Lynch, and K. K. Berggren, Superconducting
nanowire spiking element for neural networks, Nano Letters 20, 8059 (2020).
[122] O. Astafiev, L. Ioffe, S. Kafanov, Y. A. Pashkin, K. Y.
Arutyunov, D. Shahar, O. Cohen, and J. S. Tsai, Coherent quantum phase slip, Nature 484, 355 (2012).
[123] R. Cheng, U. S. Goteti, H. Walker, K. M. Krause,
L. Oeding, and M. C. Hamilton, Toward learning in neuromorphic circuits based on quantum phase slip junctions, Frontiers in Neuroscience 15, 765883 (2021).
[124] R. Cheng, U. S. Goteti, and M. C. Hamilton, Spiking
neuron circuits using superconducting quantum phaseslip junctions, Journal of Applied Physics 124, 152126
(2018).
[125] J. Liu, Q. Wu, X. Sui, C. Qian, G. Guohua, W. Liping, and L. Shengcai, Research progress in optical neural
networks: theory, applications and developments, PhotoniX 2, 5 (2021).
[126] J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, M. Karpov, H. Gehring,
X. Li, M. Stappers, M. L. Gallo, X. Fu, A. Lukashchuk,
A. S. Raja, J. Liu, C. D. Wright, A. Sebastian, T. J. Kippenberg, W. H. P. Pernice, and H. Bhaskaran, Parallel
convolutional processing using an integrated photonic
tensor core, Nature 589, 52 (2021).
[127] A. Jha, C. Huang, and P. R. Prucnal, Reconfigurable
all-optical nonlinear activation functions, in 2020 IEEE
Photonics Conference (IPC) (2020) pp. 1–2.
[128] A. N. Tait, T. Ferreira de Lima, M. A. Nahmias, H. B.
Miller, H.-T. Peng, B. J. Shastri, and P. R. Prucnal,
Silicon photonic modulator neuron, Phys. Rev. Appl.
11, 064043 (2019).
[129] Z. Cheng, C. Rı́os, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D.
Wright, and H. Bhaskaran, On-chip photonic
synapse, Science Advances 3, e1700160 (2017),

29
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.1700160. [145] L. Yang, R. Ji, L. Zhang, J. Ding, , and Q. Xu, On[130] J. Robertson, E. Wade, Y. Kopp, J. Bueno, and A. Hurchip cmos-compatible optical signal processor, Optics
tado, Toward neuromorphic photonic networks of ulexpress 20, 13560 (2012).
trafast spiking laser neurons, IEEE Journal of Selected
[146] I. Chakraborty, G. Saha, and K. Roy, Photonic inTopics in Quantum Electronics 26, 1 (2020).
memory computing primitive for spiking neural net[131] Y. Zhang, J. Robertson, S. Xiang, M. Hejda, J. Bueno,
works using phase-change materials, Phys. Rev. Appl.
and A. Hurtado, All-optical neuromorphic binary con11, 014063 (2019).
volution with a spiking vcsel neuron for image gradient
[147] S. Pei, S. Tang, S. Yan, S. Jiang, X. Zhang, and
magnitudes, Photon. Res. 9, B201 (2021).
Z. Zheng, How to enhance the dynamic range of
[132] H.-T. Peng, G. Angelatos, T. F. de Lima, M. A. Nahexcitatory-inhibitory excitable networks, Phys. Rev. E
mias, A. N. Tait, S. Abbaslou, B. J. Shastri, and P. R.
86, 021909 (2012).
Prucnal, Temporal information processing with an inte[148] J. Rinzel and G. Huguet, Nonlinear dynamics of neugrated laser neuron, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
ronal excitability, oscillations, and coincidence detecQuantum Electronics 26, 1 (2020).
tion., Commun Pure Appl Math. 66, 1464 (2013).
[133] J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, C. David Wright,
[149] A. Hurtado, A. Quirce, A. Valle, L. Pesquera, and
H. Bhaskaran, and W. Pernice, All-optical spiking neuM. Adams, Nonlinear dynamics induced by parallel and
rosynaptic networks with self-learning capabilities, Naorthogonal optical injection in 1550 nm vertical-cavity
ture 569, 208 (2019).
surface-emitting lasers (vcsels), Opt Express. 18, 9423
[134] M. A. Nahmias, B. J. Shastri, A. N. Tait, T. F. de Lima,
(2010).
and P. R. Prucnal, Neuromorphic photonics, Opt. Pho[150] S. Takougang, Kingni, G. Van der Sande, L. Gelens,
ton. News 29, 34 (2018).
T. Erneux, and J. Danckaert, Direct modulation of semi[135] T. Cao, R. Wang, R. E. Simpson, and G. Li, Photonic
conductor ring lasers: Numerical and asymptotic analge-sb-te phase change metamaterials and their appliysis, Opt. Soc. Am. B 29, 1983 (2012).
cations, Progress in Quantum Electronics 74, 100299
[151] Y. Lu, W. Zhang, B. Fu, and H. Z., Frequency(2020).
switched photonic spiking neurons, Opt Express 30,
[136] N. Raeis-Hosseini and J. Rho, Metasurfaces based
21599 (2022).
on phase-change material as a reconfigurable plat[152] W. Zhang, M. Hejda, E. Malysheva, Q. R. A. Al-Taai,
form for multifunctional devices, Materials 10,
J. Javaloyes, E. Wasige, J. M. L. Figueiredo, V. Dolores10.3390/ma10091046 (2017).
Calzadilla, B. Romeira, and A. Hurtado, Tunable presy[137] C. Rı́os, N. Youngblood, Z. Cheng, M. L. Gallo,
naptic weighting in optoelectronic spiking neurons built
W. H. P. Pernice, C. D. Wright, A. Sebastian, and
with laser-coupled resonant tunneling diodes, Journal of
H. Bhaskaran, In-memory computing on a phoPhysics D: Applied Physics 56, 084001 (2023).
tonic platform, Science Advances 5, eaau5759 (2019),
[153] B. Romeira, J. M. L. Figueiredo, and J. Javaloyes, Dehttps://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.aau5759.
lay dynamics of neuromorphic optoelectronic nanoscale
[138] C. Rı́os, M. Stegmaier, P. Hosseini, D. Wang,
resonators: Perspectives and applications, Chaos: An
T. Scherer, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. P.
Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 27,
Pernice, Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multi-level
114323 (2017), https://pubs.aip.org/aip/cha/articlememory, Nature Photon 9, 725 (2015).
pdf/doi/10.1063/1.5008888/14003565/114323_1_online.pdf.
[139] M. Stegmaier, C. Rios, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright, ,
[154] D. Cimbri, J. Wang, A. Al-Khalidi, and E. Wasige,
and W. H. P. Pernice, Nonvolatile all-optical 1×2 switch
Resonant tunneling diodes high-speed terahertz wirefor chipscale photonic networks, Advanced Optical Maless communications - a review, IEEE Transactions on
terials 5, 1600346 (2016).
Terahertz Science and Technology 12, 226 (2022).
[140] J. Zheng, A. Khanolkar, P. Xu, S. Colburn, S. Desh[155] M. A. Nahmias, B. J. Shastri, A. N. Tait, and P. R.
mukh, J. Myers, J. Frantz, E. Pop, J. Hendrickson,
Prucnal, A leaky integrate-and-fire laser neuron for ulJ. Doylend, N. Boechler, and A. Majumdar, Gst-ontrafast cognitive computing, IEEE Journal of Selected
silicon hybrid nanophotonic integrated circuits: a nonTopics in Quantum Electronics 19, 1 (2013).
volatile quasi-continuously reprogrammable platform,
[156] M. A. Nahmias, A. N. Tait, B. J. Shastri, T. F. de Lima,
Opt. Mater. Express 8, 1551 (2018).
and P. R. Prucnal, Excitable laser processing network
[141] Z. Cheng, C. Rı́os, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D.
node in hybrid silicon: analysis and simulation, Opt.
Wright, and H. Bhaskaran, On-chip photonic
Express 23, 26800 (2015).
synapse, Science Advances 3, e1700160 (2017),
[157] P. R. Prucnal, B. J. Shastri, T. F. de Lima, M. A. Nahhttps://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.1700160.
mias, and A. N. Tait, Recent progress in semiconductor
[142] I. Chakraborty, G. Saha, A. Sengupta, and K. Roy, Toexcitable lasers for photonic spike processing, Adv. Opt.
ward fast neural computing using all-photonic phase
Photon. 8, 228 (2016).
change spiking neurons, Scientific reports 8, 12980
[158] J. Robertson, T. Deng, J. Javaloyes, and A. Hurtado,
(2018).
Controlled inhibition of spiking dynamics in vcsels for
[143] D. Kuzum, R. Jeyasingh, B. Lee, and H. Wong, Naneuromorphic photonics: theory and experiments, Opt.
noelectronic programmable synapses based on phase
Lett. 42, 1560 (2017).
change materials for brain-inspired computing, Nano
[159] A. Hurtado, I. D. Henning, and M. J. Adams, Optical
Lett. 12, 2179 (2012).
neuron using polarisation switching in a 1550nm-vcsel,
[144] Z. Cheng, C. Rı́os, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D.
Opt. Express 18, 25170 (2010).
Wright, and H. Bhaskaran, On-chip photonic
[160] J. Robertson, E. Wade, and A. Hurtado, Electrically
synapse, Science Advances 3, e1700160 (2017),
controlled neuron-like spiking regimes in vertical-cavity
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.1700160.
surface-emitting lasers at ultrafast rates, IEEE Journal

30
of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 25, 1 (2019).
[161] T. Deng, J. Robertson, and A. Hurtado, Controlled
propagation of spiking dynamics in vertical-cavity
surface-emitting lasers: Towards neuromorphic photonic networks, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics 23, 1 (2017).
[162] H.-T. Peng, G. Angelatos, T. F. de Lima, M. A. Nahmias, A. N. Tait, S. Abbaslou, B. J. Shastri, and P. R.
Prucnal, Temporal information processing with an integrated laser neuron, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics 26, 1 (2020).
[163] S. Xiang, Y. Zhang, J. Gong, X. Guo, L. Lin, and
Y. Hao, Stdp-based unsupervised spike pattern learning in a photonic spiking neural network with vcsels
and vcsoas, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 25, 1 (2019).
[164] B. Ma and W. Zou, Demonstration of a distributed feedback laser diode working as a graded-potential-signaling
photonic neuron and its application to neuromorphic
information processing, Sci. China Inf. Sci. 63, 160408
(2020).
[165] R. Toole, A. N. Tait, T. Ferreira de Lima, M. A. Nahmias, B. J. Shastri, P. R. Prucnal, and M. P. Fok, Photonic implementation of spike-timing-dependent plasticity and learning algorithms of biological neural systems,
Journal of Lightwave Technology 34, 470 (2016).
[166] W. Coomans, L. Gelens, S. Beri, J. Danckaert, and
G. Van der Sande, Solitary and coupled semiconductor ring lasers as optical spiking neurons, Phys. Rev. E
84, 036209 (2011).
[167] B. Kelleher, C. Bonatto, G. Huyet, and S. P. Hegarty,
Excitability in optically injected semiconductor lasers:
Contrasting quantum- well- and quantum-dot-based devices, Phys. Rev. E 83, 026207 (2011).
[168] B. Kelleher, D. Goulding, S. P. Hegarty, G. Huyet, D.-Y.
Cong, A. Martinez, A. Lemaître, A. Ramdane, M. Fischer, F. Gerschütz, and J. Koeth, Excitable phase slips
in an injection-locked single-mode quantum-dot laser,
Opt. Lett. 34, 440 (2009).
[169] K. Alexander, T. V. Vaerenbergh, M. Fiers, P. Mechet,
J. Dambre, and P. Bienstman, Excitability in optically
injected microdisk lasers with phase controlled excitatory and inhibitory response, Opt. Express 21, 26182
(2013).
[170] B. J. Shastri, M. A. Nahmias, A. N. Tait, A. W. Rodriguez, B. Wu, and P. R. Prucnal, Spike processing

with a graphene excitable laser, Sci Rep 6, 19126 (2016).
[171] K. Berggren, Q. Xia, K. K. Likharev, D. B. Strukov,
H. Jiang, T. Mikolajick, D. Querlioz, M. Salinga, J. R.
Erickson, S. Pi, et al., Roadmap on emerging hardware
and technology for machine learning, Nanotechnology
32, 012002 (2020).
[172] J. M. Shainline, S. M. Buckley, A. N. McCaughan,
J. Chiles, A. Jafari-Salim, R. P. Mirin, and S. W. Nam,
Circuit designs for superconducting optoelectronic loop
neurons, Journal of Applied Physics 124, 152130 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5038031.
[173] J. M. Shainline, S. M. Buckley, A. N. McCaughan,
J. T. Chiles, A. Jafari Salim, M. Castellanos-Beltran,
C. A. Donnelly, M. L. Schneider, R. P. Mirin, and
S. W. Nam, Superconducting optoelectronic loop neurons, Journal of Applied Physics 126, 044902 (2019),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5096403.
[174] S. Khan, B. Primavera, J. Chiles, A. McCaughan,
S. Buckley, A. Tait, A. Lita, J. Biesecker, A. Fox,
D. Olaya, et al., Superconducting optoelectronic singlephoton synapses (2022).
[175] J. M. Shainline, B. A. Primavera, and S. Khan, Phenomenological model of superconducting optoelectronic
loop neurons, Physical Review Research 5, 013164
(2023).
[176] D. S. Pashin, P. V. Pikunov, M. V. Bastrakova, A. E.
Schegolev, N. V. Klenov, and I. I. Soloviev, A bifunctional superconducting cell as flux qubit and neuron,
Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 14, 1116 (2023).
[177] L. E. Suárez, B. A. Richards, G. Lajoie, and B. Misic,
Learning function from structure in neuromorphic networks, Nature Machine Intelligence 3, 771 (2021).
[178] H. Cai, Z. Ao, C. Tian, Z. Wu, H. Liu, J. Tchieu, M. Gu,
K. Mackie, and F. Guo, Brain organoid reservoir computing for artificial intelligence, Nature Electronics 6,
1032 (2023).
[179] L. E. Suárez, A. Mihalik, F. Milisav, K. Marshall, M. Li,
P. E. Vértes, G. Lajoie, and B. Misic, Connectomebased reservoir computing with the conn2res toolbox,
Nature Communications 15, 656 (2024).
[180] L. Smirnova, B. S. Caffo, D. H. Gracias, Q. Huang, I. E.
Morales Pantoja, B. Tang, D. J. Zack, C. A. Berlinicke,
J. L. Boyd, T. D. Harris, et al., Organoid intelligence
(oi): the new frontier in biocomputing and intelligencein-a-dish, Frontiers in Science 1, 1017235 (2023).

