Journal of Neural
Engineering

You may also like

PAPER • OPEN ACCESS

A spiking neural network with continuous local
learning for robust online brain machine interface
To cite this article: Elijah A Taeckens and Sahil Shah 2023 J. Neural Eng. 20 066042

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

- Reducing power requirements for highaccuracy decoding in iBCIs
Brianna M Karpowicz, Bareesh Bhaduri,
Samuel R Nason-Tomaszewski et al.
- Robust and accurate decoding of hand
kinematics from entire spiking activity
using deep learning
Nur Ahmadi, Timothy G Constandinou and
Christos-Savvas Bouganis
- Investigating the benefits of artificial neural
networks over linear approaches to BMI
decoding
Hisham Temmar, Matthew S Willsey,
Joseph T Costello et al.

This content was downloaded from IP address 154.59.124.113 on 23/05/2026 at 14:33

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

https://doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/ad1787

Journal of Neural Engineering
PAPER

OPEN ACCESS
RECEIVED

A spiking neural network with continuous local learning for robust
online brain machine interface

14 August 2023

Elijah A Taeckens∗ and Sahil Shah

REVISED

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, United States of America
∗
Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.

13 December 2023
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION

20 December 2023

E-mail: etaeckens@gmail.com

PUBLISHED

Keywords: brain machine interface, spiking neural network, neural decoding, kinematic decoding, continuous learning

4 January 2024

Original Content from
this work may be used
under the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 licence.

Abstract
Objective. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are powerful tools that are well suited for brain
machine interfaces (BMI) due to their similarity to biological neural systems and computational
Any further distribution
efficiency. They have shown comparable accuracy to state-of-the-art methods, but current training
of this work must
maintain attribution to
methods require large amounts of memory, and they cannot be trained on a continuous input
the author(s) and the title
stream without pausing periodically to perform backpropagation. An ideal BMI should be capable
of the work, journal
citation and DOI.
training continuously without interruption to minimize disruption to the user and adapt to
changing neural environments. Approach. We propose a continuous SNN weight update algorithm
that can be trained to perform regression learning with no need for storing past spiking events in
memory. As a result, the amount of memory needed for training is constant regardless of the input
duration. We evaluate the accuracy of the network on recordings of neural data taken from the
premotor cortex of a primate performing reaching tasks. Additionally, we evaluate the SNN in a
simulated closed loop environment and observe its ability to adapt to sudden changes in the input
neural structure. Main results. The continuous learning SNN achieves the same peak correlation
(ρ = 0.7) as existing SNN training methods when trained offline on real neural data while
reducing the total memory usage by 92%. Additionally, it matches state-of-the-art accuracy in a
closed loop environment, demonstrates adaptability when subjected to multiple types of neural
input disruptions, and is capable of being trained online without any prior offline training.
Significance. This work presents a neural decoding algorithm that can be trained rapidly in a closed
loop setting. The algorithm increases the speed of acclimating a new user to the system and also
can adapt to sudden changes in neural behavior with minimal disruption to the user.

1. Introduction
Brain machine interfaces (BMI) are systems that process neural signals from the human brain and use
the processed signals to control external devices, such
as prosthetic limbs [1, 2]. These technologies can
be very beneficial to users who have lost limbs or
suffered spinal cord injuries by allowing them to have
improved mobility and reduced dependence on caretakers. Surveys have indicated that paralyzed patients
have generally positive attitudes towards BMIs [3, 4].
BMI systems consists of three major parts: signal acquisition and processing, feature decoding, and
device output [5–7], as shown in figure 1. The best
results in kinematic decoding are typically achieved

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd

when signal acquisition is performed by an implanted
electrode the brain, which allows enough spatial
resolution to distinguish the activity of individual
neurons [8]. After signal acquisition, there exist a
variety of different decoding algorithms that can
be used to extract kinematic information from the
neural signals. The Kalman filter is often considered
the gold standard in neural decoding, having demonstrated superior accuracy to linear decoders in several studies [9, 10], but machine learning techniques
have also recently shown promise, especially recurrent networks such as LSTMs [11, 12]. However,
these recurrent networks often take several epochs to
train, which can require large amounts of memory
[13].

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

Figure 1. (a) An overview of the main components present in a BMI system. A BMI begins with signal acquisition, in which raw
voltage readings from electrodes in the brain are recorded and organized into spike sequences via threshold encoding and spike
sorting algorithms. These spike sequences are then sent to a decoder, which extracts kinematic information from the neural data.
Predicted kinematics are then sent to a motor output, such as a prosthetic limb. (b) A more detailed view of the systems present in
a neural decoder with continuous learning. The decoder consists of a function which takes neural spiking data S(t) and a matrix
of weights W as inputs. The decoder function outputs a predicted kinematic state, x̂(t). In BMI operation, x̂(t) is used to control a
motor output. During training, the predicted kinematics can be compared with ground truth kinematic data x(t) using a loss
function, L(x,x̂). The loss is used to update the weight values.

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are a type of artificial network that are particularly natural to apply
in a BMI application due to their biological nature.
SNNs propagate information in the form of discrete sequences of events called spike trains, and
process these spike trains using models that closely
mimic the action potentials that drive information
flow in real biological neurons [14, 15]. This makes
them well suited for BMI tasks since the input data
from the electrodes is already in the form of biological spikes, so no additional pre-processing is
needed. Additionally, SNNs have been shown to be
very power efficient due to the sparse nature of
the spiking data [16–18], which can be critical for
implanted chips, where power dissipation must not
exceed 40 mW cm−2 [19].
Previous work has explored the use of SNNs for
neural decoding [19–22]. In [19], authors demonstrated an SNN that could replicate the behavior of
a Kalman filter using the neural engineering framework. More recent work has shown that SNNs trained
with surrogate gradient descent can also provide
highly accurate results. In [20] authors demonstrated that SNNs can achieve superior performance
to Kalman filters and artificial neural networks for
decoding finger velocity, while [22] showed an SNN
decoder with comparable accuracy to an LSTM for
decoding arm velocity or body position. However,
there are still several challenges that need to be
addressed before SNNs can become viable decoding
options for a robust and accurate BMI. In previous
studies, the SNNs were trained in parallel using short
training samples recorded at different points in time.
2

This technique, known as batching, is commonly used
to make machine learning algorithms more robust
[23], but it is less practical for real world BMI use,
in which the system would ideally be trained on chronologically sequential data as the user learns to use it.
These SNNs also require more memory as the duration of training data increases, since they must store
past spiking events to perform backpropagation. This
large memory storage during the training process is
not practical for a hardware implementation, which
is one of the main motivations for developing SNN
neural decoders.
Additionally, SNN decoders have not been tested
in an online BMI setting, in which the user attempts
to use the BMI in real time and receives information about the output of the BMI. Neural decoders
trained offline can have quite different results when
applied an online setting due to the adjustments made
by the user in response to feedback from the BMI
system [24–26]. Even decoders that perform well initially in an online setting may see a decrease in performance over time due to changes in the structure
of nearby neurons or sudden loss of neurons [27, 28].
Additionally, current online decoding methods often
require a period of offline training first, in which the
user imagines performing movements [26]. A BMI
that can be trained entirely online would require no
need for imagined movement on behalf of the user,
potentially lowering the difficulty for new users to
acclimate to a BMI.
This work presents a SNN for neural decoding that can be trained continuously without the
need to pause training and perform backpropagation.

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

Unlike previous continuous learning methods, this
novel algorithm is specifically designed for predicting continuous functions such as velocity. There are
two main aims of this work: first, to show that the
continuous learning SNN decoder can achieve comparable accuracy to existing methods in an offline
decoding setting with reduced memory consumption; and second, to show that the continuous learning SNN is capable of quickly adapting to sudden
changes in neural behavior and can also learn entirely
online with no prior training. To address the first
aim, we train the continuous learning algorithm on
two different datasets consisting of neural and kinematic data from non-human primates performing
reaching tasks [29, 30]. To address the second aim,
we train the continous learning SNN in a simulated closed loop environment and evaluate its performance after disruptions to the neural inputs.
For both experiments, we compare the performance of the continuous learning SNN with existing
SNN decoders, Kalman filter decoders, and a LSTM
decoder.
The structure of this paper is outlined as follows: section 2 presents the architecture of the SNN,
detailing its components and learning algorithms.
Within this section, section 2.4 provides an overview
of the standard learning rules applied in SNN training, while section 2.5 introduces innovative weight
update mechanisms devised for regression tasks in
SNNs, facilitating continuous learning. Section 3
details the experimental setup and benchmarks various algorithms. More precisely, section 3.1 discusses
the methodologies and findings from experiments
with offline datasets, and section 3.2 delineates the
closed-loop experimental protocols and their outcomes. Finally, section 4 reflects on the implications
of the proposed continuous learning algorithm and
proposes avenues for future research.

2. SNN design
2.1. Neuron and synapse models
SNNs take as input a sequence of discrete events
known as a spike train, defined formally as S(t) =
∑
(k)
kϵC δ(t − t ), where C is the set of all events and
(k)
t represents the timing of event k in C. SNN layers
consist of neuron models that perform operations on
the spiking input and produce their own spike trains
that propagate on to the next layer. There are a variety of neuron models, all of which seek to imitate
the action potentials found in biological neurons. For
this study, we use the leaky integrate-and-fire neuron
model [31] due to its relative simplicity to implement, but the work can easily be generalized to other
models.
The LIF neuron maintains two internal values: the
synaptic current, I(t), and the membrane potential,
U(t). The synaptic current and membrane potential
3

Figure 2. A graphical depiction of the spiking neural
network architecture described below. The SNN consists of
two hidden layers consisting of 65 and 40 neurons. The
output readout layer consists of two neurons corresponding
to the velocity in x and y directions.

of the ith neuron in a layer L in the network are governed by following:
∑
dIli
= −Ili (t) +
Wij Slj−1 (t)
dt

(1)

)(
)
dUli ( l
= −Ui (t) + Ili (t) 1 − Sli (t)
dt

(2)

τsyn

j

τmem

(
)
Sli (t) = Θ Uli (t) − ν

(3)

where W represents the matrix of weights applied to
the input spikes and τ syn and τ mem are time constants
[32]. The neuron emits a spike whenever the membrane potential, U(t), crosses a threshold value, at
which point the membrane potential is reset to 0.
2.2. SNN architecture
The SNN used in this study consists of an input layer
of 46 input neurons, two hidden layers of 65 and
40 neurons, respectively, and a readout layer with
two output neurons. The sizes of the hidden layers
and other parameters were optimized using Bayesian
Optimization [33]. A graphical representation of the
SNN architecture is shown in figure 2.
2.3. Readout function
SNNs are typically used either for classification tasks,
in which the readout layer consists of several spiking neurons and the output is determined by selecting
the neuron with the highest spiking rate [34, 35], or
for modelling spike rates [36]. Neural decoders, however, are designed for regression tasks, in which the
decoder outputs continuous real-valued functions.
For this study, we focus on the task of predicting
2D velocity of an arm controlling a computer cursor.
This task was selected because it is one of the most
widely studied BMI tasks [10, 37] with several public
data sets containing neural and kinematic data [29,
30]. Cursor control has the practical application of

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

enabling BMI users to navigate a computer, granting
them greater autonomy. To enable 2D cursors control with a SNN, the SNN output must be modified to
produce two continuous real-values functions corresponding to the x and y components of predicted arm
velocity. SNN decoders can be adapted to produce
these functions by adding a readout layer consisting
of two leaky-integrate neurons that never emit spikes
[20, 22], where the output is given by the neuron’s
membrane potential. This method of computing the
output has several desirable properties, such as the
fact that the membrane potential is a continuous and
differentiable function, so there will be no unnatural
instantaneous changes in the predicted velocity. The
kth readout value Ylk for hidden layer l is given by:
τsyn

∑
dJlk
= −Jlk (t) +
Rki Sli (t)
dt
i

τmem

dYlk
dt

= −Ylk (t) + Jlk (t)

(4)

where Rki represents a fixed readout weight between
the ith hidden layer neuron and kth readout neuron.

where Ylk is the kth readout value and Yˆk is the corresponding target value. The partial derivative in the
weight update equation is then given by:
)
l
∑(
∂Ll
ˆl − Y ∂Yk .
=
Y
k
k
∂Wlij
∂Wlij
k

(7)

Since Ylk is a function of the output spikes Sli of hidden
∂ Yl

layer l, ∂ Wkl can be expressed in terms of the derivij

ative of Sli (t) with respect to the weights. Due to the
discontinuous nature of spike trains, the derivative
of the spiking function, Sli , is not well defined. To
fix this issue, the heaviside step function Θ(Uli (t)) is
replaced with a differentiable function σ(Uli (t)) that
closely approximates it to perform surrogate gradient
descent, as shown in [32]. With this adjustment, the
derivative of the spiking output can be expressed as:
( l
) ∂Uli (t)
∂Sli (t)
′
=
σ
U
(t)
−
1
.
i
∂Wijl
∂Wlij

(8)

∂ Ul (t)

To find ∂ Wi l without using backpropagation though
ij

2.4. Learning rules for training SNN
Traditionally, SNNs have been trained using unsupervised learning rules such as spike timing-dependent
plasticity [38]. However, neural decoders such as
Kalman filters and machine learning models are typically trained using supervised learning to extract kinematic information from the neural data [11]. SNNs
can be trained in a supervised manner using surrogate gradient descent, a modified version of gradient descent that approximates gradients for the nondifferentiable spiking output of SNNs [32]. However,
the calculation of these gradients typically involves
backpropagation through both the layers of the network and backpropagation through time to account
for the effect of previous spiking events on the output. This requires a large amount of memory that
is prohibitive for use in a continuous learning setting. In [39], a technique known as deep continuous
local learning (Decolle) is introduced that addresses
the issues of backpropagation through both space
and time. Local learning removes the need for backpropagation through the neural network by assigning
a local readout layer with fixed weights to each hidden
layer in the network. The general formula for determining updating weights via local learning is given by
∆Wij = −η

∂Ll
∂Wlij

(5)

where η is the learning rate and Ll is the loss function
for the readout of layer l. When using mean squared
error loss, the loss function is given by:
Ll =

∑(

)2
Ylk − Yˆk

(6)

k

4

time, the equations for I(t) and U(t) are rewritten
using the following equivalent expressions:
τsyn

dQlj
dt
dPlj

= −Qlj (t) + Slj (t)

= −Plj (t) + Qlj (t)
dt
∑
Uli (t) =
Wlij Plj−1

τmem

(9)

j

Here, the functions Q(t) andP(t) are simply used as
a way of rewriting equation (2) in a way that can
be differentiated without dependence on past events.
Qj (t) increases every time neuron j emits a spike
and decreases exponentially otherwise, while Pj (t)
increases at a decreasing rate after each spike.
is now simply equal to Plj−1 (t).

∂ Uli (t)
∂ Wlij

2.5. Novel learning rules for regression
The standard Decolle learning rule works well for
classification tasks or simple regressions, but it is not
well suited for the task of neural decoding, as we
shown in section 3.1.2. This is because the readout
function for the Decolle algorithm is a simple linear
sum of the spiking output Sli . Due to the sparse nature
of neural spiking data, this readout function results in
highly discontinuous outputs. Predicting velocity for
control of a prosthetic requires a system that will preserve important properties of velocity, such as continuity and differentiability, to ensure smooth control. Our readout function, described in section 2.3,
uses integration with decay to produce an output that
satisfies these properties. This means that the output
at any time is a function of previous spiking inputs,

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

Table 1. Definition of variables used for learning.

Variable

Function

Ili (t)

The synapse current of a neuron in layer l. It adds the weighted sum of the spikes from the previous layer
with a decay controlled by τ syn .
The membrane potential of a neuron. This value integrates the weighted sum of spikes from the previous
layer with a decay controlled by τ mem .
The weight connecting neuron j in layer l–1 to neuron I in layer l.
The spiking output of a neuron in layer l, it emits a spike when Uli (t) passes a unit threshold value.
These integrate the spiking output of an individual neuron in a layer. Uli (t) can alternatively be expressed
as a weighted some of all Plj−1 (t), where the derivative of Uli (t) is given by Plj−1 (t).
The kth readout value for layer l. This value is generated by integrating the weighted sums of spikes
output from layer l.
The weight connecting the ith neuron in layer l to the kth readout value.
These integrate the derivative of the spiking output Sli (t) with respect to weight Wlij , and are used to
calculate the derivative of Ylk .
Constants that control the rate of decay for the synaptic current I(t) and membrane potential U(t),
respectively. The decoder performs best when τmem >> τsyn . For offline experiments, τ mem was in the
range of 50–100 ms while τ syn was between 0.5 and 2 ms.

Uli (t)
Wlij
Sli (t)
Qlj (t), Plj (t)
Ylk (t)
Rlki
Hlij (t), Glij (t)
τ syn , τ mem

not just the current spiking inputs. In order to properly calculate the weight updates, we need to find the
derivative of the output with respect to all past spiking
outputs. This is distinct from the Decolle algorithm,
where only the derivative with respect to the current spiking output is needed, and necessitates a new
learning rule. We describe this novel learning rule
below.
To find the derivative of the output function
Ylk with respect to the weights, it will be useful to
rewrite (4) as the convolution of Sli with a kernel function, K(t), as shown in [40]:
∑
Ylk (t) = Rlki
Sli (τ ) K (t − τ )
(10)

K (t) = e−t/τmem − e−t/τsyn .

(11)

Using the property of derivatives of convolutions, it
can be shown that
∑ ∂Sl (t)
∂ ∑ l
i
Si (τ ) K (t − τ ) =
K (t − τ )
∂Wij τ
∂W
ij
τ
(12)
∂ Sl (t)

i
is defined in the previous section by
where ∂ W
ij
equations (8) and (9).
The expression on the left of equation (12) is
mathematically equivalent to the following two differential equations:

τmem

dt
dGijl
dt

= −Hlij (t) +

(14)

Recall that Ylk is the output of layer l and is given
by (4). Equations (13) and (14) rewrite this equation
to allow for calculating the derivative.
Putting all of these together yields the full weight
update equation:
∑(

)
Ylk − Yˆk Rki .

(15)

k

where K(t) is given by

dHlij

∂Ylk
= Rlki Glij
∂Wlij

∆Wij = −ηGlij (t)

τ

τsyn

each time step, allowing the algorithm to incorporate
the effect of past spikes on the output without actually
storing those spikes in memory. The complete derivative of the readout value is then given by:

∂Sli (t)
∂Wlij

= −Glij (t) + Hlij (t) .

These differential equations integrate

(13)

∂ Sli (t)
, rather
∂ Wlij

than Sli (t). The values Hi jl and Gi jl can be updated at
5

There are several equations used in to calculate
the total weight update equation. Table 1 defines the
variables and constants used as part of the weight
update algorithm and the role of each variable.
This weight update equation accounts for all previous states of both the hidden layer neuron and
the readout neurons without requiring any memory
overhead to store the historical states of these neurons. It does require supplementary functions in the
form of Glij and Hlij , but these only increase the
memory complexity to O(NL), where N is the number of input neurons and L is the input layer size.
The memory complexity of BPTT is O(NT), where T
is the input duration. In BMI applications, L is typically significantly less than T, since SNN performance do not increase significantly after the layer size
increases beyond about 50–60 neurons [22], whereas
the number of time steps could easily enter the hundreds of thousands for a continuous experiment that
lasts longer than an hour, assuming a neural sampling
rate of 100 Hz.
Additionally, because the memory does not have
to store past states and produces weight update values

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

at every time step, the learning rule proposed in this
work is capable of online continuous learning. When
training with backpropagation through time, a SNN
must first do a forward pass on a training example,
and then stop and backpropagate through the training example to calculate the gradients before moving on to the next example. The continuous learning
algorithm proposed in this work evaluates the forward pass and weight updates simultaneously, allowing the weights to be updated at every time step
without ever needing to pause the experiment.

3. Experimental procedure and results
3.1. Offline learning
3.1.1. Evaluation data
The SNN was trained and tested on two different data sets containing intracortical neural recordings and corresponding kinematic data from nonhuman primates performing reaching tasks [29, 30,
41, 42]. The first data set, taken from the collaborative research in computational neuroscience (CRNCS)
dataset repository, contained recordings from the
premotor cortex of a monkey as it moved a cursor
towards an indicated 2 cm by 2 cm target on a 20 cm
by 20 cm computer screen. The velocity of the onscreen cursor was sampled at 1000 Hz. Raw neural
recordings were performed using a 100 channel Utah
electrode array. The neural recordings were preprocessed to form spike trains using standard manual
spike sorting techniques [29], yielding 46 independent neurons. Both the neural and kinematic data were
placed into 10 ms bins before being passed to the network, with neural data limited to at most 1 spiking
event per bin. 5.4% of all spiking events were lost due
to the 10 ms binning. The mean inter-spike interval
was 175 ms. Each reach lasted up to 1.7 s. The second
data set, referred to by the authors as ‘MC Maze’, contains recordings from the motor and premotor cortex
of a monkey as it performs reaching tasks while navigating the boundaries of a 2D maze [42]. Neural data
was recorded using 2 96-electrode arrays implanted
in the PMd and M1 regions. Spike sorting was performed offline to isolate independent neurons; the
trial that we used contained 107 neurons in total.
Spike times were determined via threshold crossing.
Both the neural data and corresponding hand velocity data were placed in 1 ms bins. The authors did
not provide information about how many spiking
events were lost due to this binning, but the mean
inter-spike interval was 221.9 ms. Reaching tasks last
up to 600 ms. Decoders were trained on spiking data
from 130 ms prior to movement onset to 370 ms after
movement onset, per the instructions of the authors
of the data set.
3.1.2. Batched learning comparison
SNN decoders have traditionally been trained using
batched learning methods [20, 22]. To ensure a
6

valid comparison with existing decoders, the continuous learning model in this study was also trained
using batched learning. For the evaluation of this
model, two datasets were used: CRCNS and MC
Maze. The performance of the proposed continuous learning algorithm for SNNs was benchmarked
against several established methods: SNN trained
using backpropagation-through-time (BPTT), an
SNN trained using unmodified DeColle learning
algorithm [39], a Kalman filter, and a LSTM decoder.
The Kalman filter is often used as a standard
benchmark for comparing new BMI decoders [20,
43], while the LSTM was selected due to recent
work demonstrating superior accuracy to other
methods [11, 44]. Additionally, an SNN trained with
unmodified DeColle learning rules described in [39]
to demonstrate the necessity of the novel continuous
learning algorithm. This Decolle-trained SNN uses a
linear readout function and as a result is not expected
to perform well for this task; it is included to show the
necessity of the continuous learning rule introduced
in this paper.
The results for each decoder are shown in figure 3
comparing the average peak correlation coefficients
achieved by each decoding method across 10 different train-test splits for the CRCNS PMD data set and
the MC Maze data set, respectively. All models were
trained using 10 different train-test splits for each
data set. In each split, 60% of the data was used for
training, and 20% for testing. The remaining 20%
was isolated from all train test splits and used as validation for optimizing hyperparameters, such as the
time constants used to determine the spiking dynamics. The Kalman filter demonstrated higher accuracy
when using binned sums of the neural data; a 50 ms
sliding window was used to bin the neural data for
the CRCNS data set, while a 10 ms sliding window
was used for the MC Maze data set. The LSTM also
demonstrated higher performance with a 10 ms sliding window for the MC Maze data set.
The barplot in figure 3 shows the pearson correlation coefficients which is a square root of coeffecient of determination (r 2 ). Further the barplot
show the error bars that are proportional to standard
deviation. Most decoders achieve correlation coefficients between 0.5 and 0.8, with the exception of
the unmodified DeColle algorithm, which was not
designed specifically for neural decoding. Welch’s
t-test was used to determine if the differences in
mean correlations were statistically significant; the
results showed that the continuous learning SNN
decoder results were significantly different in both
the x and y direction when compared to the Kalman
filter (p < 0.05), LSTM (p < 0.05), and unmodified
Decolle (p < 0.001) on the CRCNS data set, but only
significantly different from the unmodified DeColle
(p < 0.01) on the MC Maze data set. The significance value are shown in figure 3 at top of the bar
plot. These results demonstrate that the continuous

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

Figure 3. (a) and (b) Comparison of the average correlation coefficients achieved by each decoding method across 10 different
train-test splits for the CRCNS PMD data set and the MC Maze data set, respectively. For each train-test split, each model is
trained on 60% of the available data, with 20% used for testing. The continuous learning SNN is compared with 4 other decoding
methods. The error bars shown for each decoding method are proportional to the sample standard deviation and represent 95%
confidence intervals, assuming that the correlations from different splits tend towards a normal distribution. Welch’s t-test was
used to determine if the differences in mean correlations were statistically significant. The corresponding p-values are shown
above each comparison decoder. The results showed that the continuous learning SNN decoder results were significantly different
(p < 0.05) in both the x and y direction when compared to the unmodified DeColle, Kalman filter, and LSTM on the CRCNS data
set, but only significantly different from the unmodified DeColle on the MC Maze data set. In general, these results indicate that
the performance of the continuous SNN on offline datasets is comparable to existing methods. (c) A 30 s sample comparing the
ground-truth kinematic data with the predicted kinematic data output by continuous learning SNN. The network used to
generate this example was trained for 50 epochs.

learning SNN can achieve comparable performance
to an equivalent SNN trained with BPTT and to
standard neural decoders.
All decoding methods except the Kalman filter
were trained using iterative error-based methods,
i.e. each decoder was initialized with random weights
and generated predicted velocity outputs using the
training neural data as inputs. The mean squared
error between the predicted and true velocity was
used to update the weights, and the process was
repeated for 30 epochs for each decoder. The Kalman
filter was trained by fitting measurement and transition matrices to the training data, as described in
[10].
3.1.3. Memory footprint
The continuous learning SNN shows a significantly
reduced memory footprint compared to the BPTT
learning methods. Reach tasks from the CRCNS data
set were typically between 1.0 and 2.0 s; for a 50neuron input with a 1.0 s duration and a batch size
of 1, the stochastic gradient descent BPTT algorithm
had a minimum memory requirement of 838 KB
to store all necessary spiking data and gradients. By
comparison, the continuous learning SNN had a minimum memory requirement of just 144 KB to store all
necessary information, regardless of the duration of
the input. Table 2 compares the amount of memory
consumed by each function used during continuous
learning and BPTT learning. These values represent
lower bounds on the amount of memory used by
each system; they are calculated by measuring the
size of the arrays instantiated during training multiplied by 4 bytes per floating point value. As a result,
the minimum memory requirements are independent of the programming environments used to implement the two learning methods. The actual amount
7

Table 2. The memory used by each part of the learning process for
continuous learning and BPTT during a standard reaching trial
(50 input neurons, 1.0 s duration). The continuous learning
method uses less overall memory because it only needs to save
current values of S(t) and U(t), while BPTT needs to save all past
values for these functions.

Memory usage (kB)

Continuous learning

S(t)
I(t)
U(t)
Y(t)
P(t), Q(t)
G(t), H(t)
Misc.
Total (kB)

0.41
1.28
2.05
0.03
2.05
137.11
0.85
143.78

BPTT

S(:)
I(:)
U(:)
Y(:)
Misc.
Total (kB)

484.38
3.41
331.41
15.78
3.41
838.38

of memory used during implementation cannot easily be compared because BPTT was implemented with
the Pytorch machine learning library, which adds a
large amount of memory overhead. The majority of
the memory used by the BPTT algorithm comes from
the need to store the full spiking history of every
neuron to calculate gradients. This means that the
memory used by BPTT scales linearly with both the
input duration and the number of neurons in the network. By contrast, the majority of memory used by
the continuous learning SNN is the memory required
to store the values Gij and H ij for each neural connection. This means that the memory usage of the continuous learning SNN scales linearly with number of
input neurons, assuming that the number of hidden

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

Figure 4. (a) Memory complexity for each learning method when the input size is held at a constant 50 neurons. The memory
required to perform continuous learning is constant regardless of input duration, whereas the memory required by BPTT scales
linearly with input duration. (b) The memory required for both learning methods when input duration is held constant at 1.0 s,
with an input timestep of 10 ms. scales linearly with number of input channels. The slope of the line for continuous learning is
determined by the size of the hidden layers, whereas the slope of the continuous learning line is determined by the input duration.
(c) The conditions under which each learning method requires less memory, assuming 10 ms time step and constant hidden layer
size. In the blue region, the BPTT algorithm requires less memory, while in the red region, the continuous learning algorithm
requires less memory. The black line represents the boundary where both methods require the same amount of memory. This
graph shows that the continuous learning algorithm is more efficient when the input duration is long or when the number of
input neurons is small. Even with a large number of input neurons, the continuous learning algorithm is still more efficient if the
input duration is any longer than 0.5 s. This makes the continuous learning algorithm ideal for training in real time on multiple
reaching trials.

neurons stays constant, and is invariant to input duration, as shown in figure 4. Even with large input sizes
of up to 1000 neurons or electrode input channels, the
continuous learning method uses less memory when
the training duration is longer than about 500 ms.
3.1.4. Continuous learning
Current state-of-the-art decoders use batched training, which requires simultaneously training on data
that was recorded at different points in time for
several epochs. To reduce calibration time and disruptions to the user, a BMI that can learn continuously would make more sense. Surveys conducted on patients with motor impairments show that
users prefer BMI systems that offer high accuracy,
minimal daily setup, and multifunctionality [3, 45,
46]. To test the continuous learning capabilities of
the SNN, we again evaluated it on the premotor
cortex dataset, but this time with no batching and
without splitting the recording into discrete training
examples. Additionally, to test the ability of the network to maintain performance after training stops,
we ran the experiment multiple times with different training times. The results show that the SNN
converges rapidly, performing most of the learning
within the first 300 s. The accuracy does not noticeably decline during the testing phase, regardless of
when training stops. The peak correlation achieved
is less than the peak correlation achieved after multiple epochs of training, but it does achieve the same
peak correlation as the batched learning did after a
single training epoch. We benchmark the continuous
learning performance against that of an SNN trained
with BPTT. The BPTT algorithm cannot learn continuously, so we instead allow it to pause and perform backpropagation after each individual reaching
task (duration 1.0–1.7 s). Both methods eventually
8

Figure 5. A sliding window average of the Pearson
Correlation achieved by two different SNNs trained on a
single epoch of reaching data. A sliding window with a 60 s
duration is used to smooth out noise in the plots. The X
and Y correlations are averaged for each SNN. Although
both models eventually reach the same peak correlation, the
continuous learning SNN learns more quickly. Both models
maintain their performance after training stops. The figure
does not include the time it takes for BPTT to pause to
perform backpropagation (an average of 35 ms for a reach
of 1.7 s).

achieve the same peak correlation, but the continuous
learning mechanism learns more quickly, as shown in
figure 5. Additionally, BPTT takes longer than indicated in the figure, since it must pause after each
reach to perform backpropagation. Backpropagation
for one reach takes an average of 35 ms, which introduces a delay in training after hundreds of reaches and
also interrupts the user.
3.2. Closed loop experiments
While offline experiments on pre-recorded data
are commonly used to evaluate neural decoder
performance, they do not always correlate well with

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

performance in an online, closed-loop setting [24–
26]. In a closed loop environment, the output of the
BMI is fed directly to the output device, allowing the
user to attempt to correct for any errors in the BMI
output in real time. This user feedback can have significant impacts on the performance of a BMI system.
3.2.1. Experimental procedure
Performing a real closed loop experiment on human
subjects can be expensive and time consuming.
Neural simulations have been shown to produce
neural data that more closely mimic the neural
responses of real human subjects using a closed loop
BMI when compared to real neural data taken from
offline experiments [47]. For this work, we adapt the
online prosthetic simulator (OPS) described in [25].
The OPS uses the cosine tuning model to determine the spiking rates of neurons [48], in which each
neuron has a ‘preferred direction’ and is more likely
to fire when the direction of motion is in its preferred
direction. The firing rate λt of the kth neuron at time
t is given by:
λt = (λmax − λmin ) ck ∗ xt + λmin

(16)

where λmin and λmax are the minimum and maximum firing rates, respectively, ck is a unit vector in the neuron’s preferred direction, and xt represents the desired acceleration vector at time t.
λt was constrained to be greater than or equal
to zero. Acceleration was used to determine firing
rates because the real neural data used in the previous section showed a much stronger correlation
with acceleration than with velocity or position. We
sampled direction vectors uniformly from the unit
circle. Maximum and minimum firing rates were
sampled between 40 and 100 and between 0 and
5 spikes per second, respectively. These values were
again chosen to match the firing rates found in real
neural data, and match closely with values used in
previous OPS simulations. In [25], a Poisson distribution with parameter λt was used to determine the
number of spikes in each time bin. Since SNNs operate on individual spikes, and since Poisson random
variables can be represented as an approximation of
a sum of many Bernoulli variables, we modeled each
neuron as a Bernoulli random variable with spiking
probability p = λt ∗ ts using a spike sampling period
ts = 10 ms.
The OPS was previously used in [25] to generate simulated neural activity for people performing center-out reaching tasks, with ground truth kinematic data used as the input to generate simulated
neural activity. In the absence of real human test subjects, we use a virtual center-out reach task simulation in which targets are placed at random locations a
fixed distance away from a central starting point. The
ground truth kinematic data that is sent to the OPS is
generated by assuming that a real user would always
9

Figure 6. (a) A plot of the magnitudes of the intended
position, velocity, and acceleration profiles for a sample
reach in which the simulator travels along its intended path.
The units of time are in seconds (on x-axis), while the
distance units are arbitrary. (b) Graphical depiction of the
feedback system used by the closed loop simulator. The
system starts by generating an intended acceleration vector
in the direction of the target, which is sent to the OPS to
generate simulated neural spikes. The spiking activity is
decoded by the SNN to produce a predicted velocity, which
is used to update the current position. At the next time step,
a new target acceleration is generated based on the updated
position.

attempt to move in the direction of the target. This
assumption has previously been used to train online
neural decoders to a high level of accuracy [26]. This,
along with constraints on the velocity and acceleration, is used to generate intended kinematic profiles,
as shown in figure 6(a). Target acceleration vectors
are then sent to the OPS to generate neural activity,
which is in turn decoded by the SNN to produce a predicted velocity and update the position. At the next
time step, the new velocity and acceleration vectors
go from the current position to the target, as shown
in figure 6(b).
For all experiments described below, a reach is
considered successful if the decoder is able to stay
within a unit distance of the target for at least 500 ms
(the targets were placed 4 unit distances away from
the central starting location). Reach tasks are allowed
to proceed for a maximum of 3.0 s, after which
point they will be considered failed. These values
are generally in line with previous center-out reach
experiments [26, 41].
3.2.2. Neural variability and disruptions
One of the main challenges with using BMIs in a
closed loop setting is the decrease in decoding quality
that can occur as a result of neural disruptions [27].
We performed several closed loop simulations to evaluate the effects of various neural disruptions on the
SNN decoding performance. Prior to the closed loop
experiments, the SNN was trained on 400 simulated

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

Figure 7. Plots of average time to target (top) and selected reaching paths (bottom) of simulated closed loop experiments testing
three different kinds of neural disruption: neural dropout (a), changing kinematic mapping (b), and shifting firing rates (c). The
top graphs show the average time required to secure the target for the continuous learning SNN (red), BPTT SNN (blue), ReFIT
Kalman Filter (black) and LSTM decoder (yellow). The results are averaged across 10 different simulations, with a sliding window
average of 4 reaches also applied to smooth out the results. The bottom graphs show the path taken by the continuous learning
SNN decoder on eight example reach tasks after any neural disruption and retraining. The red circles around each target represent
the window that the decoder has to stay inside for the reach to be considered successful. In (a) and (b), the solid green line
represents the time at which the neural disruption occurred, while in (c), it represents the time at which firing rates stabilized. For
all experiments, SNN continuous training starts at the solid green line and stops at the dotted green line. The other decoders are
re-trained after the dotted green line using data from the 30 reaches performed between the two green lines.

reaches for 5 epochs using batched learning. The
reaches were generated using the OPS described
above. To provide standards of comparison for SNN
performance, we also trained a ReFIT Kalman Filter,
a SNN with BPTT learning, and a LSTM decoder on
simulated offline reaches. The ReFIT Kalman filter is a
modified Kalman filter decoder designed specifically
for closed loop BMI experiments that accounts for the
lack of uncertainty in the measured position, since the
position is determined by the output of the decoder
[26]. The BPTT SNN was included to show how the
continuous learning rule affects adaptability. LSTM
decoders have shown the ability to surpass the performance of Kalman filters for both offline and online
decoding tasks [11, 44], so it provides an additional
comparison standard for the current state-of-the-art.
The Kalman filter demonstrates increased performance with binned spike rates, so a sliding window of
10 time samples was used to bin the neural data before
input to the Kalman filter. Additionally, the LSTM
decoder was trained on 30 online reaches after the offline training to increase robustness, a technique that
has been shown to improve online decoding accuracy
for machine learning models [43].
After offline training, the different decoding models performed 3 closed loop simulation experiments.
The performance of each decoder is measured using
average time to secure the target, a common metric
for evaluating closed loop BMI performance [25, 26].
10

For each experiment, 10 simulations are performed
with different neurons selected for disruption. The
results in figure 7 are averaged across all 10 simulations. In the first experiment, 30 out of 46 input neurons were removed after 50 reaches. This simulates a
loss of connection to neurons that is common in real
BMI systems due to electrodes shifting or becoming
damaged [24, 49]. The continuous learning SNN was
allowed to train using continuous learning for 30 subsequent reaches, while the other decoders were recalibrated on neural data from the first 30 reaches
after reassignment. Here, the SNN with continuous
learning can learn without any pause in the usage of
the BMI device whereas the BMI system has to be
paused to allow calibration of the other decoders. The
continuous learning SNN gets closest to a return to
baseline performance, as seen in figure 7, with the
largest performance drop seen by the BPTT SNN.
In the second experiment, the preferred directions
of 30 neurons were randomly reassigned. Although
real neurons do not suddenly change behavior like
this, it is common for electrodes used in implantable BMI to shift during use and start picking up
data from a new set of neurons [24, 27], which can
be simulated by changing the properties of the existing neurons. All decoders showed a large decrease
in quality following neural reassignment. As with
the previous experiment, the decoders are re-trained
using 30 reaches after the simulated disruption. The

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

continuous learning SNN was able to return to close
to pre-disruption performance, while the performance of other decoders remains worse than predisruption levels. (figure 7). Additionally, the SNN
training can be more easily implemented in a real BMI
use setting; if a user notices a sudden decrease in quality, they can perform reaching tasks with continuous
learning until quality improves. The other decoders
cannot learn continuously, so to fix a performance
drop a user must instead perform an arbitrary number of reaches and then wait for the decoder to be
retrained on the new data.
In the last experiment, the maximum firing rates
of the input neurons were allowed to change for
the first 50 reaches. Real neurons have been shown
to demonstrate changes in their firing rates over
time [50], and degrading electrode quality can also
cause apparent neural firing rates to decrease an an
electrode ages. For this experiment, neurons were
assigned a new ‘target’ maximum firing rate between
0 and 30 spikes per second. The neurons approached
the new firing rates exponentially with time constants
chosen to be normally distributed with a mean of
30 seconds. After firing rate drift, the SNN trained
continuously for 30 reaches, while the other decoders
were re-trained after 30 reaches. All systems show a
moderate decrease in performance which does not
appear to improve after retraining, although the effect
is most dramatic for the BPTT SNN. This suggests
that although the continuous learning SNN decoder
is fairly robust to changing firing rates, it is not capable of compensating for those changing rates by
additional training.
3.2.3. Closed loop learning
An additional simulation was performed to see if the
SNN was capable of learning in a closed loop setting without prior offline training. An untrained SNN
was trained online using continuous learning for 30
reaches, and then tested for an additional 70 reaches
post training; figure 8. shows the average time to
secure the target. Here, online learning means that
the output of the SNN was used to determine the
cursor velocity from the beginning, even when the
model parameters were completely randomized, and
learning was performed by comparing the SNN output to the ideal direction of movement. As a result, the movement in the beginning will be uncontrolled and somewhat random; the goal is to show
that the SNN can learn from this random movement
and update its weights accordingly to allow more controlled movement. This is contrasted from the offline learning used to train the models in the subsection prior to disruption, where the cursor path is
fixed and the output of the SNN is not actually used
to control the cursor. In a real-world BMI experiment, the offline training would be performed by asking a subject to imagine moving a prosthetic, whereas
online training would involve asking the person to
11

Figure 8. A plot showing the average time taken to reach
the target for a continuous learning SNN, BPTT SNN,
Kalman filter, and LSTM that received no prior training.
The results shown are averaged across 10 different
simulations. The output of each decoder is used to control
the cursor during training, so the time to reach the target is
not fixed, unlike offline learning. The continuous learning
SNN learns rapidly, requiring only 30 reaches of online
trials to achieve the same average time to target achieved by
the decoders that were trained offline in the previous
experiment. The other decoders are unable to learn from
online trials, and typically fail to acquire the target.

actually move the prosthetic and performing weight
updates to correct any errors in movement. The continuous learning SNN converged rapidly, achieving
average times under 1.0 seconds (the minimum possible time to secure the target is 740 ms). For comparison, other untrained decoders were also subjected to
a similar trial, including a ReFIT Kalman filter, LSTM,
and another SNN. The first 30 reaches were conducted online using parameters that were randomized
and constrained to a range of values that would produce reasonable outputs. After 30 reaches, the Kalman
filter was fit to the neural data from the 30 training reaches, while the SNN and LSTM were trained
on the 30 reaches using backpropagation. Unlike the
continuous learning SNN, the other decoders were
unable to learn from the online reaching tasks, and
failed to reach the target within the 3 s limit for the
majority of trials. This demonstrates that the continuous learning SNN is capable of learning entirely
online, without a need for imagined offline reaches,
which could make BMI calibration much easier for
new users.

4. Discussion and conclusion
4.1. Significance
The continuous weight update mechanism for neural
decoding SNNs presented in this paper has two
significant applications for practical BMI. First, it
allows training on an arbitrary duration input with
a fixed amount of memory. This makes it significantly easier to implement the algorithm in hardware, since there is no need for dynamic allocation
of memory or introducing a hard limit on the input
duration. One of the primary motivations for using

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

SNNs is their power efficiency [22], which could
enable safe implantation of a decoder directly inside
a user’s brain, with no need for connection to an
external device. In order to realize this power efficiency, a hardware implementation will be necessary,
and this work takes an important step in that direction by introducing learning with a finite amount of
memory. Future work should aim to implement the
algorithm in a hardware system and measure its true
power efficiency.
Additionally, the continuous nature of the weight
update mechanisms presented here make the SNN
ideal for use in a closed loop system. Adaptability is an
important trait for online decoders, since implanted
electrodes tend to shift over and degrade in quality
over time, which can cause decreases in neural performance. The SNN presented here demonstrates an
ability to maintain high performance after multiple
different types of neural disruptions, including neural
dropout, introduction of new neurons, and changing neural firing rates, with average time-to-target
remaining within 20% of the pre-disruption baseline
level after retraining for each disruption. The SNN
can also train rapidly in an exclusively online setting,
with no need for prior offline training, an ability not
shared by other standard online decoders. This could
reduce the difficulty of BMI calibration tasks for new
users by removing the need for offline training in
which the user must imagine a movement without
physical feedback.
4.2. Limitations and future research
The proposed model does have some limitations that
should be addressed in future work. It still requires
more memory than the BPTT training algorithm in
cases where the input duration is extremely short and
the number of inputs is large, as shown in section 3.1.
Additionally, although the decoder enables faster
adaptation to neural disruptions than existing methods, it still needs to be recalibrated with a sequence
of designed reaching tasks to provide ground truth
data, as do all other decoders examined in this paper.
Future work should invest unsupervised calibration
methods to allow algorithms to adapt with minimal
disruption to the user.
Future research should also explore methods to
optimize the SNN learning algorithm. Currently, the
weight update algorithm is based on stochastic gradient descent. As shown in results, the continuous
learning algorithm falls slightly short of the peak
accuracy achieved by BPTT when trained offline with
the Adam optimizer. Future work should investigate
whether the accuracy of the continuous learning SNN
can be improved by implementing more sophisticated
optimization techniques, such as momentum.
Subsequent studies should also investigate the
performance of the SNN in a real closed loop
trial using animal model. Simulations have been
demonstrated to be reliable predictors of actual closed
12

loop performance, but a verification is still an important step before the algorithm is ready for use in an
actual clinical care setting.

Data availability statement
The code used in this paper, including the continuous
learning SNN, BPTT SNN, and the code used to run
the closed simulations, can be found at https://code.
umd.edu/sshah389/spiking-based-brain-machineinterface.
All data that support the findings of this study are
included within the article (and any supplementary
files).

Funding
This work was partly funded by the Mtech ASPIRE
scholarship program, by the UMD Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering Undergraduate
Research Assistantship, and by the National Science
Foundation through Award Number #2210804

ORCID iDs
Elijah A Taeckens  https://orcid.org/0000-00020939-4523
Sahil Shah  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-74032388

References
[1] Musallam S, Corneil B D, Greger B, Scherberger H and
Andersen R A 2004 Cognitive control signals for neural
prosthetics Science 305 258–62
[2] Jackson A, Moritz C T, Mavoori J, Lucas T H and Fetz E E
2006 The neurochip BCI: towards a neural prosthesis for
upper limb function IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehab. Eng.
14 187–90
[3] Collinger J L, Boninger M L, Bruns T M, Curley K, Wang W
and Weber D J 2013 Functional priorities, assistive
technology and brain-computer interfaces after spinal cord
injury J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 50 145–60
[4] Lahr J, Schwartz C, Heimbach B, Aertsen A, Rickert J and
Ball T 2015 Invasive brain-machine interfaces: a survey of
paralyzed patients’ attitudes, knowledge and methods of
information retrieval J. Neural Eng. 12 043001
[5] Saha S, Mamun K A, Ahmed K, Raqibul M, Naik G R,
Darvishi S, Khandoker Ahsan H and Baumert M 2021
Progress in brain computer interface: challenges and
opportunities Front. Syst. Neurosci. 15 578875
[6] Shih J, Krusienski D J and Wolfpaw J R 2012 Brain-computer
interfaces in medicine Mayo Clinic Proc. 87 268–79
[7] Andrew B Schwartz X T C, Douglas J W and Daniel W M
2006 Brain-controlled interfaces: movement restoration with
neural prosthetics Neuron 52 205–20
[8] Shaikh S and Basu A 2022 Intelligent intracortical
brain-machine interfaces: next generation of scalable neural
interfaces Handbook of Biochips ed M Sawan (Springer)
pp 869–89
[9] Wu W, Shaikhouni A, Donoghue J R and Black M J 2004
Closed-loop neural control of cursor motion using a kalman
filter 26th Annual Int. Conf. IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (IEEE)
[10] Kim S-P, Simeral J D, Hochberg L R, Donoghue J P and
Black M J 2008 Neural control of computer cursor velocity

J. Neural Eng. 20 (2023) 066042

E A Taeckens and S Shah

by decoding motor cortical spiking activity in humans with
tetraplegia J. Neural Eng. 5 455–76
[11] Glaser J I, Benjamin A S, Chowdhury R H, Perich M G,
Miller L E and Kording K P 2020 Machine learning for
neural decoding eNeuro 7 4
[12] Liu F, Meamardoost S, Gunawan R, Komiyama T, Mewes C,
Zhang Y, Hwang E and Wang L 2022 Deep learning for
neural decoding in motor cortex J. Neural Eng.
19 056021
[13] Hochreiter S and Schmidhuber J 1997 Long short-term
memory Neural Comput. 9 1735–80.
[14] Mead C 1990 Neuromorphic electronic systems Proc. IEEE
78 1629–36
[15] Indiveri G et al 2011 Neuromorphic silicon neuron circuits
Front. Neurosci. 5 73
[16] Varkey Benjamin B et al 2014 Neurogrid: a
mixed-analog-digital multichip system for large-scale neural
simulations Proc. IEEE 102 699–716
[17] Park J, Sohmyung H, Theodore Y, Neftci E and
Cauwenberghs G 2014 A 65k-neuron 73-Mevents/s
22-pJ/event asynchronous micro-pipelined
integrate-and-fire array transceiver 2014 IEEE Biomedical
Circuits and Systems Conf. (BioCAS) Proc. pp 675–8
[18] Andreou A G, Boahen K A, Pouliquen P O, Pavasovic A,
Jenkins R E and Strohbehn K 1991 Current-mode
subthreshold MOS circuits for analog VLSI neural systems
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2 205–13
[19] Dethier J, Nuyujukian P, Ryu S I, Shenoy K V and Boahen K
2013 Design and validation of a real-time
spiking-neural-network decoder for brain-machine
interfaces J. Neural Eng. 10 036008
[20] Liao J, Widmer L, Wang X, Di Mauro A,
Nason-Tomaszewski S R, Chestek C A, Benini L and Jang T
2022 An energy-efficient spiking neural network for finger
velocity decoding for implantable brain-machine interface
4th Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems
(IEEE)
[21] Dethier J, Nuyujukian P, Eliasmith C, Stewart T, Elasaad S,
Shenoy K V and Boahen K A 2011 A brain-machine interface
operating with a real-time spiking neural network control
algorithm Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
vol 24 (Curran Associates, Inc.)
[22] Taeckens E, Dong R and Shah S 2023 A biologically plausible
spiking neural network for decoding kinematics in the
hippocampus and premotor cortex 11th Int. IEEE EMBS
Conf. on Neural Engineering (IEEE)
[23] Santurkar S, Tsipras D, Ilyas A and Madry A 2018 How does
batch normalization help optimization? Advances in Neural
Information and Processing Systems
[24] Rouanne V, Costecalde T, Louis Benadid A and Aksenova T
2022 Unsupervised adaptation of an ecog based
brain-computer interface using neural correlates of task
performance Sci. Rep. 12 21316
[25] Cunningham J P, Nuyujukian P, Gilja V, Chestek C A, Ryu S I
and Shenoy K V 2011 A closed-loop human simulator for
investigating the role of feedback control in brain-machine
interfaces J. Neurophysiol. 105
[26] Gilja V, Nuyujukian P, Chestek C A, Cunningham J P,
Byron M Y, Fan J M, Ryu S I and Shenoy K V 2012 A brain
machine interface control algorithm designed from a
feedback control perspective Int. Conf. IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (IEEE)
[27] Linderman M D, Santhanam G, Kemere C T, Gilja V,
O’Driscoll S, Byron M Y, Afshar A, Ryu S I, Shenoy K V and
Meng T H 2008 Signal processing challenges for neural
prostheses IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 25 18–28
[28] Sussillo D, Stavisky S D, Kao J C, Ryu S I and Shenoy K V
2016 Making brain-machine interfaces robust to future
neural variability Nat. Commun. 7 13749
[29] Perich M G, Lawlor P N, Kording K P and Miller L E
(CRCNS) 2018 Extracellular neural recordings from
macaque primary and dorsal premotor motor cortex
during a sequential reaching task (https://doi.org/
10.6080/K0FT8J72)

13

[30] Churchland M and Kaufman M 2022 DANDI archive Mc
maze small: macaque primary motor and dorsal premotor
cortex spiking activity during delayed reaching [data set]
(https://doi.org/10.48324/dandi.000140/0.220113.0408)
[31] Indiveri G 2003 A low-power adaptive integrate-and-fire
neuron circuit Proc. 2003 Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems
(IEEE) pp IV-820–3
[32] Neftci E O, Mostafa H, and Zenke F 2019 Surrogate gradient
learning in spiking neural networks (arXiv:1901.09948
[cs, q-bio])
[33] Snoek J, Larochelle H and Adams R P 2012 Practical
Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms Proc.
25th Int. Conf. on Neural Information Processing
Systems—Volume 2 (NIPS’12) pp 2951–9
[34] Jiang C, Yang L and Zhang Y 2022 A spiking neural network
with spike-timing-dependent plasticity for surface roughness
analysis IEEE Sens. J. 22 438–45
[35] Chowdhury S N and Shah S 2022 Hardware aware modeling
of mixed-signal spiking neural network 20th IEEE
Interregional NEWCAS Conf. (IEEE)
[36] Rostro-Gonzalez H, Cessac B and Vieville T 2012 Parameter
estimation in spiking neural networks: a reverse-engineering
approach J. Neural Eng. 9 026024
[37] Pan K, Li Li, Zhang L, Simeng Li, Yang Z and Guo Y 2022 A
noninvasive BCI system for 2d cursor control using a
spectral-temporal long short-term memory network Front.
Comput. Neurosci. 16 799019
[38] Diehl P U and Cook M 2015 Unsupervised learning of digit
recognition using spike-timing-dependent plasticity Front.
Comput. Neurosci. 9 99
[39] Kaiser J, Mostafa H and Neftci E 2020 Synaptic plasticity
dynamics for deep continuous local learning (DECOLLE)
Front. Neurosci. 14 424
[40] Gao T, Deng B, Wang J and Guosheng Y 2022 Highly
efficient neuromorphic learning system of spiking neural
network with multi-compartment leaky integrate-and-fire
neurons Front. Neurosci. 16 929644
[41] Lalower P N, Perich M G, Miller L and Kording K P 2018
Linear-nonlinear-time-warp-poisson models of neural
activity J. Comput. Neurosci. 45 173–91
[42] Churchland M M, Cunningham J P, Kaufman M T, Ryu S I
and Shenoy K V 2010 Cortical preparatory activity:
representation of movement or first cog in a dynamical
machine? Neuron 68 387–400
[43] Willsey M S, Nason-Tomaszewskim S R, Ensel S R,
Temmar H, Mender M J, Costello J T, Patil P G and
Chestek C A 2022 Real-time brain-machine interface in
non-human primates achieves high-velocity prosthetic
finger movements using a shallow feedforward neural
network decoder Nat. Commun. 13 2022
[44] Costello J T, Temmar H, Cubillos L H, Mender M J,
Wallace D M, Willsey M S, Patil P G, and Chestek C A 2023
Balancing memorization and generalization in rnns for high
performance brain-machine interfaces bioRxiv Preprint
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.05.28.542435 (posted online 28
May 2023)
[45] Snoek G J, IJzerman M J, Hermens H J, Maxwell D and
Biering-Sorensen F 2004 Survey of the needs of patients with
spinal cord injury: impact and priority for improvement in
hand function in tetraplegics Spinal Cord 42 526–32
[46] Anderson K D 2004 Targeting recovery: priorities of the
spinal cord-injured population J. Neurotrauma 21 10
[47] Heliot R, Ganguly K, Jimenez J and Carmena J M 2011
Learning in closed-loop brain-machine interfaces: modeling
and experimental validation IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B
40 1387–97
[48] Georgopoulos A P, Schwartz A B and Kettner R E 1987
Neuronal population coding of movement direction Science
26 1416–9
[49] Polikov V S, Tresco P A and Reichart W M 2005 Response of
brain tissue to chronically implanted neural electrodes J.
Neurosci. Methods 148 1-18
[50] Ganguly K and Jose M C 2009 Emergence of a stable cortical
map for neuroprosthetic control PLoS Biol. 7 7

