8th International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering
Shanghai, China, May 25 - 28 , 2017

Decoding of Motor Imagery Movements from EEG Signals
using SpiNNaker Neuromorphic Hardware
Zied Tayeb, Emeç Erçelik, and Jörg Conradt
Neuroscientific System Theory, Technical University of Munich, 80333 München, Germany

Abstract— Non-invasive brain machine interfaces (BMIs) on
motor imagery movements have been widely studied and used
for many years to take advantage of the intuitive link between
imagined motor tasks and natural actions. En route to future
technical applications of neuromorphic computing, a major
current challenge lies in the identification and implementation
of brain inspired algorithms to decode recorded signals. Neuromorphic computing is believed to allow real-time implementation of large scale spiking models for processing and computation in non-invasive BMIs. Taking inspiration from the
olfactory system of insects, we advance and implement a novel
approach to decode and predict imaginary movements from
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. We use a spiking neural
network implemented on SpiNNaker (4 chip, 64 cores) neuromorphic hardware. Our work provides a proof of concept for a
successful implementation of a functional spiking neural
network for decoding two motor imagery (MI) movements on
the SpiNNaker system. The approach can be extended to
classify more complex MI movements on larger SpiNNaker
systems.

I. INTRODUCTION
Neuromorphic platforms use a different architecture
compared to sequential computing, one that mimics brain
processing with neurons and synapses. These hardware
systems achieve a speedup and support massively parallel
data processing in a brain-inspired fashion. In contrast to
expectations according to Moore's law, the integration
density of digital processors ceased to grow during the last
decade and is unlikely to increase again. Hence,
neuromorphic architectures are perceived to be a potential
solution for this issue, as they express fundamental
differences and advantages when compared to conventional
computing infrastructure [1].
To meet the challenge of efficient neuromorphic
computing, a number of neuromorphic platforms have been
and continue to be developed such as SpiNNaker,

All authors are with the Technical University Munich, Germany,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Research Group
Neuroscientific System Theory, Center of Competence Neuroengineering.
(+49 89 28926909, e-mail: zied.tayeb@tum.de)

978-1-5090-4603-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

BrainScales hardware or IBM’s True North [2]. SpiNNaker
is a novel massively-parallel computer architecture, inspired
by the fundamental structure and function of the human
brain. Each chip is a multi-core system, consisting of 18
ARM968-based cores and also several internetworking
elements and supporting modules. Thus, it supports an
emulation of up to 12,000 neurons in biologically plausible
real-time per board (SpiNNaker-3) [3] or even about
200,000 neurons per board (SpiNNaker-5).
This work presents a first attempt to use the potential
advantages of neuromorphic computing and spiking neural
network algorithms to decode brain signals and as per our
knowledge no similar work has been published before. This
new technology can enhance EEG based brain-machine
interface classification performance which still suffers from
limited motor imagery (MI) task detection and low accuracy
due to non-stationary and non-linear characteristics of the
brain signal.
The aim of this work is therefore to decode EEG patterns
generated during two MI movements (motor imagery of left
and right hand) using a spiking neural network decoder.
Here, as the first proof-of-principle, features of EEG signals
were extracted and a classifier inspired by the olfactory
system of insects was employed and implemented on
SpiNNaker to recognize the two different MI movements.
II. METHODS
A. Data Description
Our work is based on experimental data recorded by the
Institute for Knowledge Discovery (Laboratory of BrainComputer Interfaces), Graz University of Technology. EEG
signals were collected from 9 subjects that were able to
perform long and stable motor imagery over a minimum time
of 2-s and data were sampled at 250Hz. More experimental
details are provided in [4].
B. Preprocessing and Feature Extraction
MI describes the mental rehearsal of a motor task without
its execution, such as imagination of squeezing a training
ball. These tasks induce a power increase or decrease of
EEG amplitudes in certain frequency bands (mainly alpha
and beta band) relative to a reference period and are referred

263

Authorized licensed use limited to: TU Delft Library. Downloaded on May 23,2026 at 15:01:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

as event-related (de)synchronization (ERD/ERS) [5]. Hence,
three EEG bipolar channels C3, Cz and C4 (according to the
10/20-system) have been used to analyze these imaginations
and to convert them into commands. Epochs of 2000ms with
500ms pre-stimulus baseline were extracted from the
continuous EEG data.
First, all the signals are filtered using a digital Butterworth
FIR band pass filter of order 5 in the range 8-30Hz, because
the mu rhythm (8-13Hz) and beta band (14-30Hz) fall within
this range.
Afterwards, band power (BP) features were estimated from
the ongoing EEG signal. For each of the three bipolar
channels, BP features in 72 frequency bands were calculated
using different overlapping narrow bands between 8 and 30
Hz yielding a total of 216 BP features [4]. As the
dimensionality of the extracted EEG features is usually quite
high, it is necessary to reduce the dimensionality of the
features before we use them. For this purpose, a standard
principal component algorithm PCA was applied for
dimensionality reduction leading to only 10 features [6].

Spike trains are generated in neurons in the input layer and
propagated to the decorelation layer, where projection
neuron populations to the excitatory association neurons
(orange in the association layer) are adapted by a supervised
learning mechanism during training [10].
D. Implementation on SpiNNaker
We implemented a spiking neural network that decodes
motor imagery movements from recorded EEG signals. The
network runs on SpiNNaker neuromorphic hardware and
performs its computations in a “purely spike-based fashion”
[10]. It incorporates an insect-brain-inspired, three-layer
neural architecture. Each of the 10 features from EEG data
was encoded in 20 population-coding neurons. The
activation of the different population-coded neurons was
determined by a Gaussian function and implemented on
SpiNNaker as spike source array.

Moreover, to compare performance against our method a
Support Vector Machine linear classifier [7] for two MI was
used to test and validate the feature extraction step. A
classification accuracy of 77.49 % was obtained. Note that
this classifier has been used solely for performance and
accuracy comparison with our proposed spiking neural
network classifier.
Finally, the features were fed into SpiNNaker and a
spiking neural network was trained to classify two-class MI
data (left vs right).
C. Network Architecture and Model Design
Classical machine learning algorithms have been widely
used for EEG signals decoding [8]. However, in order to
exploit the native communication protocol within the brain
(i.e. discrete events so-called spikes) in brain machine
interfaces we need to use an appropriate processing
paradigm. Such a paradigm is provided by artificial spiking
neural networks which, by using temporal information
associated with the spikes to compute, can be used to classify
remarkable events in brain signals they represent.
In this paper, we used a classifier network based on a
spiking model of the insect olfactory system [9], which has
been previously described and investigated in detail in [910]. The model’s three-stage architecture consists of (1) an
input layer designed to encode multivariate, real-valued data
samples into a population-based, positive, bounded, firingrate representation, (2) a decorrelation layer used for filtering
and reducing correlation between inputs (where populations
are grouped in ensembles that represent the so-called
glomeruli in the insect antennal lobe) and finally (3) an
association layer that forms a winner-take-all decision circuit
through strong lateral inhibition. Figure 1 presents the
spiking network model based on the olfactory system of
insects.


Fig.1. Spiking Neural Network model [10].

Each spike source array is connected to a population of
neurons in the encoding (input) layer. The input layer
consists of 200 populations of 10 neurons each, which
connect one-to one to the second (decorrelation) layer.
The decorrelation layer is organized in so-called
glomeruli, which are functional groups of neurons that exist
in the real biological model. Each glomerulus consists of the
same number (here 200*10) of populations and neurons as
the previous one.
Each glomerulus in the decorrelation layer has inhibitory
connections with other glomeruli with a probability of 40%.
The second layer has excitatory connections to the neurons
in the association layer with a probability of 50%.
The association layer consists of two inhibitory and two
excitatory glomeruli. Each of the inhibitory population has
inhibitory connections to the excitatory one with a 70%
probability.

264
Authorized licensed use limited to: TU Delft Library. Downloaded on May 23,2026 at 15:01:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SpiNNaker are shown in the upcoming figures and discussed
below.


Fig.2. Spiking Neural Network Classifier Implementation on SpiNNaker.

The Spike Source Arrays is connected to the encoding
layer by 0.2nA weights, the connection weights between
encoding layer and decorrelation layer are 0.6nA, the
inhibitory connection weights inside the decorrelation layer
are 0.03nA, the excitatory connections weights from second
layer to association layer are 0.08nA, the excitatory
connections weights inside the association layer are 0.9nA
and the inhibitory connection weights in the same layer are
0.1nA. The delay of projections was set to 1ms.
Implemented neurons are leaky integrate and fire type
neurons, and the synapse models are exponential currentbased synapses. The model parameters used are described in
detail in [11]. Furthermore, we used 60 Poisson Generators
as noise sources that excite the input layer with 10Hz firing
rate and 0.02nA connection weight.
The classification output of the network corresponds to
two labeled (left vs. right) populations in the third layer. The
difference in the firing rates of each neuron at the
decorrelation layer for each class was computed and
compared to a fixed threshold. Consequently, we were able
to determine the activity of each neuron and to determine the
one with higher spike count for a certain class. If this
difference exceeds an acceptance threshold for one class, the
connection was potentiated with a certain weight value
between the associated population in the second layer and
the AN population represented the same class in the output
layer.

Figure 3 shows the total spiking activity of neurons at the
decorelation layer for each class. These neurons present
excitatory connections to the two populations AN1 and AN2
of the output layer. This figure shows the number of active
neurons in the second layer for the features related to each
class separately. As seen, a neuron that is significantly more
active for one class makes a connection to the neurons of the
same class at the association layer, whereas the less active
neurons remain unconnected. Hence, some of the neurons
contribute to different classes to make a winner-take all
decision and form a winner population.


Fig.3. Spiking activity of the neurons in the second layer.

Figure 4 shows the spike trains that we obtained of all
neurons in the association layer during a single validation
trial. In this figure, vertical lines separate each trial of 200
ms, and dots show the time of occurrence of each spike with
its corresponding neuron.

We wish to emphasize that we didn't use directly a Spiketiming dependent plasticity (STDP) to adjust the connections
between filtering layer and association layer [11].
III. RESULTS
We tested and validated the performance of our spiking
neural network classifier implemented on SpiNNaker
neuromorphic hardware. The accuracy of our classifier
during the validation step was 75% for a single subject after
120 trials. We wish to emphasize that the massive
parallelism of SpiNNaker here is a potential advantage over
conventional computing when processing large amounts of
data in parallel. Results obtained by the implementation on


Fig.4. Spiking activity of the neurons in the association layer during
validation step (AN1 and AN2 are the two populations in the third layer
presenting the two classes).

To test the network's prediction abilities, 20 trials (10 for
each class) of non-trained data were used to validate the
performance of our classifier. Results are shown in figure 5.

265
Authorized licensed use limited to: TU Delft Library. Downloaded on May 23,2026 at 15:01:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In future work, we are aiming to scale up our model to
classify various more complex imaginary movements within
the same limb and to move from the classic motor imagery
detection (left vs right movement) to decoding complex
movement intentions. Furthermore, we are aiming to focus
on the kinematic level, where movement direction and hand
position or velocity can be decoded from EEG signals and
can be used for real-time neuroprosthesis control.


Fig.5. Total spikes at each AN population for each trial during the
validation step

The winner for each trial is the AN class that has more
spikes. In the figure, the triangles refer to class 1 and the
squares refer to class 2. Notably, the blue color presents the
correctly classified trials whereas the red color presents the
misclassified trials. If the blue square appears above the blue
triangle, the class 2 is considered to be the winner for that
trial and vice versa. To achieve better classification results, it
is utmost important to improve the used method for learning.
STDP can be an efficient strategy for our future work.
IV. DISCUSSION
In our work, an off-line classification of two MI
movements from recorded EEG signals has been achieved.
Our model uses a spiking neural network implemented on
SpiNNaker for time series data classification. The model
architecture is inspired by the olfactory system of insects and
mimics biological information processing. We achieved 75%
of correctly predicted motor imagery movement on nontrained data.
We wish to point out that the achieved result is still
slightly lower than e.g. SVM classifier (77.49%). As a
consequence, we are aiming to improve classification
performance by using a biologically plausible STDP method
to further train our network. We would like to stress that our
current approach presents a proof of concept for decoding
non-invasive brain signals using the scalable SpiNNaker
spiking neurocomputing hardware, rather than providing a
final system. We are currently running the system on the
smallest existing SpiNNaker boards, and expect significant
improvements in accuracy when scaling-up our spiking
model in future research.
As short term goal, we will work on extending the model
by incorporating also electromyography (EMG) signals,
which will be used for decoding different hand movements.
V. CONCLUSION
The above results show that using a spiking neural network
classifier can enhance the average imagery classification
accuracy in training and evaluation stages with reduced
training time and smaller energy and power consumption.

As a long-term research vision, it is likely that the model
can be improved also by explicitly including feedback. This
will be done by decoding the error-related potential (ErrP), a
time-locked potential elicited when actions do not match the
users’ expectations [9]. Such decoded information from EEG
signals will be used as a reward signal to learn and adjust the
desired behavior in a closed-loop brain machine interface.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Dr. Christoph Richter, Michael Lutter
and Stefan Ehrlich for helpful comments and discussions.
REFERENCES
[1]

M. Warldrop, the chips are down for Moore’s law, Nature, vol.530,
no.7589, pp.144-147, Feb.2016.
[2] Walter, F Röhrbein, F. & Knoll, Neuromorphic implementation of
neurobiological learning algorithms for spiking neural networks.
Neural Process, pp. 44-103, 2016.
[3] Furber, Steve B. Gulluppi, Francesco, Temple Steve, Plana, Luis A,
The SpiNNaker project, IEEE Transactions on, Vol.102, No.5,
6750072, pp.652-665, 2014.
[4] R. Leeb, F. Lee, C. Keinrath, R. Scherer, H. Bischof and G.
Pfurtscheller, "Brain–Computer Communication: Motivation, Aim,
and Impact of Exploring a Virtual Apartment," in IEEE Transactions
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 15, no. 4, pp.
473-482, Dec. 2007.
[5] Gernot Müller-Putz and Andreas Schwarz and Joana Pereira and
Patrick Ofner", From classic motor imagery to complex movement
intention decoding: "The noninvasive Graz-BCI approach",vol 228,
2016, Pages 39–70, progress in Brain Research. Elsevier BV, 2016.
[6] Muhammad Naeem, Clemens Brunner, and Gert Pfurtscheller,
“Dimensionality Reduction and Channel Selection of Motor Imagery
Electroencephalographic Data,” Computational Intelligence and
Neuroscience, vol. 2009, pp 1-3, 2009.
[7] A.Sivakami, and S.Shenbaga Devi, analysis of eeg for motor imagery
based classification of hand activities, International Journal of
Biomedical Engineering and Science (IJBES), Vol. 2, No. 3, July
2015.
[8] Nicolas-Alonso LF, Gomez-Gil J. “Brain Computer Interfaces, a
Review”. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 12(2): pp.1211-1279, 2012.
[9] Michael Schmuker, Thomas Pfeil, and Martin Paul Nawrot, “A
neuromorphic network for generic multivariate data classification”,
PNAS 111 (6), pp. 2081-2086, 2014.
[10] Lungu IA, Riehle A, Nawrot MP, Schmuker M, “Predicting voluntary
movements from motor cortical activity with neuromorphic
hardware”. IBM Journal of Research and Development, in press,
2017.
[11] Diamond Alan, Nowotny Thomas, Schmuker Michael, Comparing
Neuromorphic Solutions in Action: Implementing a Bio-Inspired
Solution to a Benchmark Classification Task on Three ParallelComputing Platforms, Frontiers in Neuroscience, Vol. 2, 2016.
[12] Francesco Di Gregorioa, Marco Steinhausera, Martin E. Maier,
“Error-related brain activity and error awareness in an error
classification paradigm”, Science Direct, pp. 202-210, 2016.

266
Authorized licensed use limited to: TU Delft Library. Downloaded on May 23,2026 at 15:01:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

